[[Ernest Jones]]

CATEGORIES: 1879 births, 1958 deaths, Freudians, British psychiatrists, Welsh psychiatrists, British psychoanalysts, British non-fiction writers, Welsh non-fiction writers, British biographers, Welsh biographers, People from Swansea, People educated at Bishop Gore School, Alumni of University College London, Academics of University College London, Fellows of the Royal College of Physicians, History of mental health in the United Kingdom, History of psychiatry, Analysands of Sándor Ferenczi

Alfred Ernest Jones (1 January 1879 – 11 February 1958) was a British neurologist and psychoanalyst, and Sigmund Freud’s official biographer. Jones was the first English-speaking practitioner of psychoanalysis and became its leading exponent in the English-speaking world where, as President of both the British Psycho-Analytical Society and the International Psychoanalytic Association in the 1920s and 1930s, he exercised a formative influence in the establishment of its organisations, institutions and publications.Maddox 2006, p.1

==Early life and career==

Jones was born in Gowerton (formerly Ffosfelin), an industrial village on the outskirts of Swansea, the son of a colliery engineer. He was educated at Swansea Grammar School, Llandovery College, Cardiff University and University College London (UCL), where in 1901 he obtained a first-class honours degree in medicine and obstetrics, followed by an MD and membership of the Royal College of Physicians in 1903. He was particularly pleased to receive the University’s gold medal in obstetrics from his distinguished fellow-Welshman, Sir John Williams.Jones 1959, p. 29
After obtaining his medical degrees Jones specialised in neurology and took a number of posts in London Hospitals. It was through his association with the surgeon Wilfred Trotter that Jones first heard of Freud’s work. Having worked together as surgeons at University College Hospital they had become close friends, with Trotter taking the role of mentor and confidant to his younger colleague. They had in common a wide-ranging interest in philosophy and literature, as well as a growing interest in Continental psychiatric literature and the new forms of clinical therapy it surveyed. By 1905 they were sharing accommodation above Harley Street consulting rooms with Jones’s sister, Elizabeth (later to become Trotter’s wife), installed as housekeeper. Jones, appalled at what he had seen of the institutionalised treatment of the mentally ill, began experimenting with hypnotic techniques in his clinical work.Jones 1959, p. 123-24
It was in 1905 in a German psychiatric journal that Jones first encountered Freud’s writings, in the form of the famous Dora case-history. It was thus he formed, as his autobiography records: “the deep impression of there being a man in Vienna who actually listened with attention to every word his patients said to him...a revolutionary difference from the attitude of previous physicians...”Brome 1982, pp. 45-46; Jones 1959, p. 159, ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria (Dora)’ (1905). The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. London: Hogarth Press. Vol 7 p11.
Jones’s early attempts to combine his interest in Freud's ideas with his clinical work with children proved to have seriously negative consequences for his career. In 1906 he was arrested and charged with two counts of indecent assault on two adolescent girls he had interviewed in his capacity as an inspector of schools for "mentally defective" children. At the court hearing Jones maintained his innocence, claiming the girl’s were fantasising. The magistrate took the view that there was no prospect of any jury believing the testimony of such children and Jones was acquitted.Maddox 2006, pp. 41-47. At the time of this episode Jones was in a particularly turbulent mental state. Demoralised by his failure to secure a position appropriate to his outstanding qualifications he was also in the throes of a powerful sexual attraction to his then client, Loe Kann. Notwithstanding his acquittal, these circumstances suggest to Maddox the possibility of a “loss of self-restraint” during the interviews.  In 1908, employed as a pathologist at a London hospital, Jones accepted a colleague’s challenge to  demonstrate the repressed sexual memory underlying the hysterical paralysis of a young girl’s arm.  Jones duly obliged but prior to conducting the interview he omitted to inform the girl’s consultant or arrange for a chaperone. Subsequently he faced complaints from the girl’s parents over the nature of the interview and was forced to resign his hospital post.Maddox 2006, pp. 58-60

==Personal life==

Jones’s first serious relationship was with Loe Kann, a wealthy Dutch émigré referred to him in 1906 after she had become addicted to morphine during treatment for a serious kidney condition. Their relationship lasted until 1913 and ended with Kann in analysis with Freud and Jones, at Freud's behest, with Sándor Ferenczi.Jones 1959, pp. 197-199
A tentative romance with Anna Freud did not survive the disapproval of her father. Before her visit to Britain in the autumn of 1914, which Jones chaperoned, Freud advised: "She does not claim to be treated as a woman, being still far away from sexual longings and rather refusing man. There is an outspoken understanding between me and her that she should not consider marriage or the preliminaries before she gets two or three years older". (Letter of 22 July 1914 (Paskauskas 1993)).
In 1917 Jones married the Welsh composer Morfydd Llwyn Owen. She died eighteen months later following complications from surgery for appendicitis.
Following some inspired matchmaking by his Viennese colleagues, in 1919 Jones met and married Katherine Jokl, a Jewish economics graduate from Moravia, who had been at school in Vienna with Freud’s daughters. In what proved to be a long and happy marriage the couple had four children, including the writer Mervyn Jones.

==Psychoanalytical career==

Whilst attending a congress of neurologists in Amsterdam in 1907, Jones met Carl Jung from whom he received a first-hand account of the work of Freud and his circle in Vienna. Confirmed in his judgement of the importance of Freud’s work, Jones joined Jung in Zurich to plan the inaugural Psychoanalytical Congress. This was held in 1908 in Salzburg where Jones met Freud for the first time. Jones then travelled to Vienna for further discussions with Freud and introductions to the members of the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society. Thus began a personal and professional relationship which, to the acknowledged benefit of both, would survive the many dissensions and rivalries which marked the first decades of the psychoanalytic movement, and would last until Freud’s death in 1939.Maddox 2006, p. 60-62
With his career prospects in Britain in serious difficulty, Jones sought refuge in Canada in 1908, taking up teaching duties in the Department of Psychiatry of the University of Toronto (from 1911, as Associate Professor of Psychiatry).  He also, in addition to his private psychoanalytic practice, worked as pathologist to the Toronto Asylum and Director of its psychiatric outpatient clinic. Following further meetings with Freud in 1909 at Clark University, Massachusetts, where Freud gave a series of lectures on psychoanalysis, and in the Netherlands the following year, Jones set about forging strong working relationships with the nascent American psychoanalytic movement, giving some 20 papers or addresses to American professional societies at venues ranging from Boston, to Washington and Chicago. In 1910 he co-founded the American Psychopathological Association and the following year the American Psychoanalytic Association, serving as its first Secretary until 1913.Maddox 2006, p. 94
He also applied himself to an intensive programme of writing and research, which produced the first of what were to be many significant contributions to psychoanalytic literature, notably monographs on Hamlet and On the Nightmare. A number of these were published in German in the main psychoanalytic periodicals published in Vienna and thereby served to secure his status in Freud's inner circle during the period of the latter's increasing estrangement from Jung. It was in this context that, in 1912, Jones initiated, with Freud's agreement, the formation of a Committee of loyalists charged with safeguarding the theoretical and institutional legacy of the psychoanalytic movement.Apart from Freud and Jones, the 1912 Committee comprised Otto Rank and Hans Sachs (from Vienna), Karl Abraham (Berlin) and Sándor Ferenczi (Budapest). Later recruits were Max Eitingon (Berlin) and Anna Freud. The Committee continued to function until 1924. This development also served the more immediate purpose of isolating Jung and, with Jones in strategic control, eventually manoeuvring him out of the Presidency of the International Psychoanalytic Association, a post he had held since its inception. When Jung's resignation came in 1914, it was only the outbreak of war which prevented Jones taking his place.Maddox 2006, p. 101-2, 113
On his return to London in 1913 Jones set up in practice as a psychoanalyst, founded the London Psychoanalytic Society and continued to write and lecture on psychoanalytic theory. A collection of his papers appeared as Papers on Psychoanalysis, the first account of psychoanalytic theory and practice to be published in the English language by a practising analyst.
By 1919, the year he founded the British Psychoanalytical Society, Jones could report proudly to Freud that psychoanalysis in Britain “stands in the forefront of medical, literary and psychological interest” (letter 27 January 1919 (Paskauskas 1993)). As President of the Society – a post he would hold until 1944 – Jones secured funding for and supervised the establishment in London of a http://www.psychoanalysis.org.uk/clinic.htm/Clinic offering subsidised fees and an Institute of Psychoanalysis which provided administrative, publishing and training facilities for the growing network of professional psychoanalysts.
Jones went on to serve two periods as President of the International Psychoanalytic Association from 1920 to1924 and 1932 to 1949. In 1920 he founded the International Journal of Psychoanalysis, serving as its editor until 1939. The following year he established the International Psychoanalytic Library, which published some 50 books under his editorship. Jones soon obtained from Freud rights to the English translation of his work and in 1924 the first two volumes of Freud's Collected Papers appeared in translations edited by Jones and supervised by Joan Riviere his former analysand and, at one stage, ardent suitor.Maddox 2006 p. 135 After a period in analysis with Freud, Riviere worked with Jones as the translation editor of the International Journal of Psychoanalysis and then on the a working group Jones set up to plan and deliver James Strachey’s translations for the Standard Edition of Freud’s work.The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud,  edited and translated from the German by James Strachey in collaboration with Anna Freud. Assisted by Alix Strachey and Alan Tyson, 24 volumes. London: Hogarth Press 1955-1974
Largely through Jones’s energetic advocacy, the British Medical Association officially recognised psychoanalysis in 1929. The BBC subsequently removed him from a list of speakers declared to be dangerous to public morality and in the 1930s he and his colleagues made a series of radio broadcasts on psychoanalysis.Maddox 2006, p. 203
After Hitler took power in Germany Jones helped many displaced and endangered Jewish analysts to resettle in England and other countries. Following the Anschluss of March 1938, Jones flew into Vienna at considerable personal risk to play a crucial role in negotiating and organising the emigration of Freud and his circle to London.Maddox 2006, p. 230. In securing the requisite immigration permits,  Jones made use of his personal relationship with the Home Secretary, Sir Samuel Hoare.  Both were keen ice skaters and members of the same London skating club.

==The Jones-Freud controversy==

Jones’s early published work on psychoanalysis had been devoted to the expositions of the fundamentals of Freudian theory, an elaboration of its theory of symbolism and its application to the analysis of religion, mythology, folklore and literary and artistic works. Under the influence of Melanie Klein his work took a new direction.
Klein had made an impact in Berlin in the new field of child analysis and had impressed Jones in giving a series of lectures to the British Society in London in 1925.  At Jones’s invitation she moved to London the following year and was soon to acquire a number of devoted and influential followers.  Her work was to have a dramatic effect on the British Society, polarising its members into rival factions as it became clear that her approach to child analysis was seriously at odds with that of Anna Freud as set out in her 1927 book An Introduction to the Technique of Child Analysis.  The disagreement centred around the clinical approach to the pre-Oedipal child with Klein arguing for play as an equivalent to free association in adult analyses. Anna Freud opposed any such equivalence proposing an educative intervention with the child until an appropriate level of ego development was reached at the Oedipal stage.  Klein held this to be a collusive inhibition of analytical work with the child.Maddox 2006 pp. 182-88
Influenced by Klein, and initiating what became known as the "Jones-Freud controversy", Jones set out to explore a range of interlinked topics in the theory of early psychic development such as the structure and genesis of the superego and the nature of the feminine castration complex.Mitchell, J. (2000) Psychoanalysis and Feminism. Harmondsworth: Penguin. pp. 130-31. Jones, E. (1927) The early development of female sexuality. International Journal of Psycho-Analysis.8:459-472; Jones, E. (1933) The phallic phase International Journal of Psycho-Analysis.14:1-33; Jones, E. (1935) ‘Early female sexuality’, International Journal of Psycho-Analysis. 16:263-273.  He coined the term “phallocentrism” in a critique of Freud’s account of sexual difference arguing along with Klein and her Berlin colleague, Karen Horney, for a primary femininity and penis envy as a defensive formation rather than arising from the fact, or “injury”, of biological asymmetry.  In a corresponding reformulation of the castration complex, Jones introduced the concept of “aphanisis” to refer to the fear of  "the permanent extinction of the capacity (including opportunity) for sexual enjoyment".Maddox 2006 p. 208
These departures from orthodoxy were noted in Vienna and were topics which featured in the regular Freud-Jones correspondence the tone of which became increasingly fractious.  Faced with accusations from Freud of orchestrating a campaign against him and his daughter Jones sought to allay Freud’s concerns without abandoning the critical standpoint he had adopted. Eventually, following a series of exchange lectures between the Vienna and London societies, which Jones arranged with Anna Freud, Freud and Jones resumed their usual cordial exchanges.
With the arrival in Britain of refugee German and Viennese analysts in the 1930s, including Anna Freud herself in 1938, the hostility between the orthodox Freudians and Kleinians in the British Society grew more intense.  Jones chaired a number of “extraordinary business meetings” with the aim of defusing the conflict and these continued into the war years.  The meetings, which became known as the Controversial discussions, were established on a more regular basis from 1942 by which time Jones had removed himself from direct participation owing to ill health and the difficulties of war-time travel from his home in Elsted, West Sussex.  He resigned from the Presidency of the British Society in 1944, the year in which, under the Presidency of Sylvia Payne, there finally emerged a tripartite compromise agreement which allowed the Freudians, Klienians and a group of “Independents” to run their own training and accreditation programmes.Maddox 2006 pp. 249-50

==Later life and death==

After the end of the war Jones gradually relinquished his many official posts whilst continuing his psychoanalytic practice, writings and lecturing. The major undertaking of his final years was his monumental account of Freud’s life and work, published to widespread acclaim in three volumes between 1953 and 1957. In this he was ably assisted by his German-speaking wife, who translated much of Freud’s early correspondence and other archive documentation made available by Anna Freud. An uncompleted autobiography, Free Associations, was published posthumously in 1959.
Always proud of his Welsh origins, Jones became a member of the Welsh Nationalist Party, Plaid Cymru. He had a particular love of the Gower Peninsula, which he had explored extensively in his youth and which, following the purchase of a holiday cottage in Llanmadoc, became a regular holiday retreat for the Jones family. He was instrumental in helping secure its status in 1956, as the first region of the UK to be designated an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.Maddox 2006, p. 14, 179
Both of Jones’s main leisure pursuits resulted in significant publications. A keen ice skater since his schooldays, Jones published an influential textbook on the subject (Jones 1931b).  His passion for chess inspired a psychoanalytical study of the life of American chess genius Paul Morphy.“The Problem of Paul Morphy - A Contribution to the Psycho-Analysis of Chess” (1931), reprinted from the International Journal of Psychoanalysis Vol 12:1-23 in Volume 1 of the 1951 edition of Essays in Applied Psychoanalysis
Jones was made a Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1942, Honorary President of the International Psychoanalytic Association in 1949 and an Honorary Doctor of Science (Wales) at Swansea University in 1954.
Jones died in London on 11 February 1958, and was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium. His ashes were buried in the grave of the oldest of his four children in the churchyard of St Cadoc's Cheriton on the Gower Peninsula.Welsh Biography Online (accessed 17 May 2011)

==Notes==

==Books by Jones==

Maddox (2006) includes a comprehensive bibliography of Jones's writings.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


