[[Billy McGinley]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, Living people, Scottish footballers, Association football defenders, The Football League players, Leeds United A.F.C. players, Huddersfield Town F.C. players, Bradford City A.F.C. players, Crewe Alexandra F.C. players, Sportspeople from Dumfries

William David "Billy" McGinley (born Dumfries, 12 November 1954) is a former professional footballer, who played for Leeds United, Huddersfield Town, Bradford City and Crewe Alexandra.

==Career==

Billy McGinley was at Leeds United when the club were managed by Don Revie and consistent trophy contenders in England and in Europe. In a side packed with seasoned regular internationals, the teenage McGinley was unable to establish himself in the first team. He made a single league appearance in season 1972/73.Leeds United on Neil Brown's player database
McGinley then spent a season at Huddersfield Town where he was unable to establish himself as a first team regular. He made 15 league appearances in which he scored once.Huddersfield Town on Neil Brown's player database
Aged 20 he found regular first team football. He spents two seasons at Bradford City from 1975 where he made 60 league appearances in which he found the net 11 times.Bradford City on Neil Brown's player database Bradford enjoyed some success in McGinley's time. In his first season the fourth division side reached the 1975–76 FA Cup quarter finals. Entering the competition at the first round, Bradford won all five of their first five ties without need of replay before succumbing to that season's eventual winners, Southampton. In McGinley's second season, 1976–77 in English football, Bradford finished fourth to earn promotion to the third division.
He then spent a season at Crewe Alexandra where was again a regular. In his 38 league appearances he scored twice.Crewe Alexandra on Neil Brown's player database Crewe were drawn against Bradford in the first round of the 1977–78 FA Cup. McGinley had the satisfaction of his side progressing with a 1-0 away win against his previous club.
Aged 23, McGinley then left the senior ranks when he joined Whitchurch Alport, moving on to Nantwich Town in the summer of 1982.

==Honours==

==References==


