[[Transfer cars]]

CATEGORIES: Production and manufacturing

Transfer cars (or transfer carts) are used to move heavy material across floors, typically in factories. There are two types: non-steerable and steerable.   Non-steerable transfer cars, which came first, are typically rail mounted, handle higher capacities up to 100 Tons, and are used to transfer material between crane bays, thus avoiding side loading of hoists.  Steerable transfer cars have wheels and can be directed anywhere in a production area. Non-steerable types run off either AC power or DC (internal battery) power. Steerable types run off an internal battery.  
Transfer cars are currently being used in lean manufacturing of large farm equipment and off-road vehicles and equipment. Typically the partially completed equipment is moved from one production cell to the next everyday or two, instead leaving the equipment stationary and moving the workers and their tools. An assembly line such as this can be made up of 14 transfer cars in session, and used in assembly operations until the wheels of the vehicle are put on. Assembly operations not currently employing this method of production waste 2 to 3 hours per vehicle in material handling the partially completed vehicle from one production cell to the next. They also increase the risk of damaging the vehicle on the assembly path through the plant. Those assembly operations would employ either a series of jib cranes or overhead cranes with slings, and/or spreader beams to move the partially assembled vehicles from one cell to another.  Transfer car normally come in a standard configuration from 5 ton up to 55 ton capacity or in a custom configuration up to 75 ton Capacity. Large capacity is typically required to be an on-rail configuration because of the weight limit of most factory concrete floors.
Transfer caris a kind of handling car which is mounted on the rail. In the modern factory, the transfer car is widely used for transfer raw materials or equipment among the different bays or warehouses in the factory. Transfer cars can be divided into the following types according to the supply power mode:motorless transfer car. In order to save the production cost, many lines such as machinery, shipbuilding, heavy industry, metallurgy begin to adopt this new transfer tool in the factory.
Motorized transfer car power supply mode include: low voltage rails offer the power, acculator offers the power, cable reel offer the power. The low voltage rail transfer car work principle: AC 380V is transformed into AC 36V by way of transformer into rails, and then sent to the current rectifier on the truck, which supply 36V direct current to DC motor. Acculator power transfer car work principle: there is an acculator on the car which offers the DC power for transfer car. The type transfer car is convenient and safe. Cable reel power transfer car work principle: It is equipped with cable reel which operates in hysteresis coupling way to insure cable safe pulling and winding in and to prevent it injured. 380 V power supply to YZ motor, VFD speed adjustment, largest transporting distance 200 meter. 
motorless transfer caris non-power transfer car running on the rail, it can be towed or manual power. The car can meet some special demand. It is convenient and utility.
http://www.haopingche.com

==External links==


