[[Bedminster Township School District]]

CATEGORIES: New Jersey District Factor Group I, School districts in Somerset County, New Jersey

The Bedminster Township School District is a community public school district that serves students in pre-Kindergarten through eighth grade from Bedminster Township, New Jersey, United States.
As of the 2010-11 school year, the district and its one school had an enrollment of 828 students and 58.3 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 14.20:1.District information for the Bedminster Township School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed May 20, 2013.
The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "I", the second highest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed December 7, 2009.
Public school students in grades 9-12 attend Bernards High School, as part of a sending/receiving relationship with the Somerset Hills Regional School District, a K - 12 district that also serves students from Bernardsville, Far Hills and Peapack-Gladstone.Somerset County School Districts-Sending/Receiving/Regional, Somerset County Superintendent of Schools. Accessed May 20, 2013.

==School==

Bedminster Township Public School had an enrollment of 590 students in the 2010-11 school year.Data for the Bedminster Township Public School, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed May 20, 2013.New Jersey School Directory for the Bedminster Township Public School, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed May 20, 2013. Corby Swan is the principal of the schoolPrincipal, Bedminster Township Public School. Accessed May 20, 2013.
Bedminster Township Public School offers a variety of competitive sports. They have had most notable success in boys and girls basketball. The school keeps a close link with Bernards High School.Bedminster Township School District 2011 Report Card Narrative, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed June 3, 2013. "After graduation from the 8th grade, the majority of our students attend Bernards High School. We work closely with their teaching staff and administration to ensure that our curriculum is fully articulated and that our students receive the highest level of preparation for their secondary school experience."

==Administration==

Core members of the district's administration are:School Committees, Bedminster Township Public School. Accessed May 20, 2013.New Jersey School Directory, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed May 20, 2013.

==References==

==External links==


