[[Oligoantigenic diet]]

CATEGORIES: Diets

An oligoantigenic diet is a diet with the least possible risk of allergic reaction.  It is used to eliminate food allergies and/or sensitivities as the cause of a particular illness.  It has been used to treat Crohn's disease http://www.revolutionhealth.com/drugs-treatments/rating/diet-oligoantigenic-diet, migraine http://www.nutramed.com/headache/migraineref.htm and ADHD http://www.nutrition4health.org/nohanews/NNW99ADHDMillichap.htm. However, treatment of ADHD with these diets is a controversial topic, as studies used to test these claims involved children who were allergic to foods. These studies also showed no improvement in measures of hyperactivity or inattention by unbiased observers. Only parental ratings indicated that children's behaviour had improved.1
The pain and discomfort that accompanies irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), migraines, fibromyalgia, and other inflammatory illnesses, is often triggered by food sensitivities. Individuals suffering from these conditions can often decrease the severity of, if not completely eliminate their symptoms by identifying and removing trigger foods. Unlike use of medication, the removal of trigger foods will often even alleviate related systemic ailments. For example, an IBS sufferer may find their depression cured as well. Food sensitivity is much more prevalent than food allergy but also more challenging to pin-point. It is most effectively determined by the Mediator Release Test (MRT) accompanied by Lifestyle, Eating And Performance (LEAP) therapy. (2,3) 
The role of the Certified LEAP Therapist (CLT) is to help individuals with IBS, migraines, fibromyalgia, and other inflammatory illnesses, determine which foods are triggering their symptoms.  CLTs have advanced clinical training in food allergies, food sensitivities, and food intolerance. In addition, they have a Bachelor of Science Degree in Nutrition, and many have advanced degrees (MS, PhD).(4) CLTs assist with the diet protocols, based on the MRT blood analysis. MRT tests an individual’s reaction to many foods and chemicals and provides a good starting point, for the CLT, in the development of an individualized dietary plan. Additional supporting research references are listed at http://nowleap.com/papers-by-medical-advisory-board/. 

==References==

 
 1. Egger et al., Lancet 1992; 339; 1150-1153.
2. Ford D, Raj S, Batheja RK, et al. American Dietetic Association: Standards of practice and standards of professional performance for registered dietitians (competent, proficient, and expert) in integrative and functional medicine. J Am Diet Assoc. 2011;111(6):902-913.
3. Williams FH. Use of the LEAP mediator release test to identify non-IgE mediated immunological food reactions that trigger diarrhea predominant IBS symptoms results in marked improvement of symptoms through use of an elimination diet. Research presented at: American College of Gastroenterology Annual Meeting; November 2004; Orlando, Fla.
4. http://certifiedleaptherapist.com/


