[[Pope Eleuterus]]

CATEGORIES: 189 deaths, 2nd-century archbishops, 2nd-century Christian saints, 2nd-century Romans, Greek popes, Greek Roman Catholic saints, Greek Roman Catholics, Greek saints, Italian Roman Catholic saints, Italian saints, Papal saints, Popes, Saints of Roman Epirus, Year of birth unknown

[tpl]For|other saints with similar names|Saint Eleutherius (disambiguation)[tpl]![/tpl]Saint Eleutherius[/tpl]

Pope Eleuterus (died 189), also known as Eleutherius, was the Bishop of Rome from c. 174 to his death in 189.Kirsch, Johann Peter (1909). "Pope St. Eleutherius (Eleutheros)" in The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 5. New York: Robert Appleton Company. The Vatican cites 171 or 177 to 185 or 193). According to the Liber Pontificalis, he was a Albanian born in Nicopolis in Epirus, .[tpl]harvnb|Brusher|1980|p=26[/tpl]; [tpl]harvnb|Butler|Attwater|Thurston|1956|p=423[/tpl]. His contemporary Hegesippus wrote that he was a deacon of the Roman Church under Pope Anicetus (c. 154–164), and remained so under Pope Soter, whom he succeeded around 174.Hegesippus, cited in Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica, 4.22; translated by G.A. Williamson, Eusebius: The History of the Church (Harmonsworth: Penguin, 1965), p. 181
The Liber Pontificalis ascribes to Pope Eleutherius a decree that no kind of food should be despised by Christians (Et hoc iterum firmavit ut nulla esca a Christianis repudiaretur, maxime fidelibus, quod Deus creavit, quæ tamen rationalis et humana est).The Book of Pontiffs (Liber Pontificalis), translated with introduction by Raymond Davies (Liverpool: University Press, 1989), p. 6 Possibly he did issue such an edict against the Gnostics and Montanists; it is also possible that on his own responsibility the writer of the Liber Pontificalis attributed to this pope a similar decree current about the year 500.

==Conversion of a British King?==

The Liber Pontificalis is responsible for a curious assertion concerning the early missionary activity of the Roman Church: the brief entry about Pope Eleutherius asserts that he received from Lucius, a British king, a letter in which the latter declared that by his behest he wishes to become a Christian (Hic accepit epistula a Lucio Brittanio rege, ut Christianus efficerentur per ejus mandatum) or literally, "This pope accepted the letter from Lucius Brittanius, king, that he might become a Christian by his own will". Whence the author of the first part of the Liber Pontificalis drew this information, it is now impossible to say. Oxford historian Felicity Heal notes Haddam and Stubbs's suggestion that it was an invention of the generation of Patrick and Palladius, intended perhaps to give encouragement and credibility to the mission effort.
As at the end of the 2nd century, the Roman administration was so securely established in Britain south of Caledonia, that there could no longer have been any real native kings in that part of the island. That some tribal chief there, known as king, should have applied to the Roman bishop for instruction in the Christian faith seems improbable enough at that period. The unsupported assertion of the Liber Pontificalis, a compilation of papal biographies that in its earliest form cannot accurately date the first quarter of the 6th century, is not a sufficient basis for the acceptance of this statement. By some it is considered a story intended to demonstrate the Roman origin of the British Church, and consequently the latter's natural subjection to Rome. To make this clearer they locate the origin of the legend in the course of the 7th century, during the dissensions between the British Church and the nascent mission of St. Augustine of Canterbury to the Saxons, recently arrived from Rome. But for this hypothesis all proof is lacking. It falls before the simple fact that the first part of the Liber Pontificalis was compiled long before these dissensions, most probably (Duchesne) by a Roman cleric in the reign of Pope Boniface II (530–532), or (Waitz and Mommsen) early in the 7th century. Moreover, during the entire conflict that centered around the peculiar customs of the Early British Church no reference is ever made to this alleged King Lucius.  Bede is the first English writer (673–735) to mention the story repeatedly (Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum, I, V; V, 24, De temporum ratione, ad an. 161), and he took it, not from native sources, but from the Liber Pontificalis. Harnack suggests that in the document which the compiler of the Liber Pontificalis drew his information the name found was not Britanio, but Britio. Now this is the name (Birtha- Britium) of the fortress of Edessa.Harnack, Sitzungsberichte der Berliner Akademie 1904, I, 906–916 The king in question is, therefore, Lucius Ælius Septimus Megas Abgar IX, of Edessa, a Christian king, as is well known. The original statement of the Liber Pontificalis, in this hypothesis, had nothing to do with Britain. The reference was to Abgar IX of Edessa. But the compiler of the Liber Pontificalis changed Britio to Brittanio, and in this way made a British king of the Syrian Lucius.
The 9th-century Historia Brittonum sees in Lucius a translation of the Celtic name Llever Maur (Great Light), says that the envoys of Lucius were Fagan and Wervan, and tells us that with this king all the other island kings (reguli Britanniæ) were baptized (Hist. Brittonum, xviii). 13th century chronicles add other details. The Liber Landavensis, for example (ed. William Jenkins Rees, 26, 65), makes known the names of Elfan and Medwy, the envoys sent by Lucius to the pope, and transfers the king's dominions to Wales. An echo of this legend penetrated even to Switzerland. In a homily preached at Chur and preserved in an 8th- or 9th-century manuscript, St. Timothy is represented as an apostle of Gaul, whence he came to Britain and baptized there a king named Lucius, who became a missionary, went to Gaul, and finally settled at Chur, where he preached the gospel with great success. In this way Lucius, the early missionary of the Swiss district of Chur, became identified with the alleged British king of the Liber Pontificalis.
According to the Liber Pontificalis, Pope Eleutherius died on 24 May and was buried on the Vatican Hill (in Vaticano) near the body of St. Peter. Later tradition has his body moved to the church of San Giovanni della Pigna, near the pantheon. In 1591, his remains were again moved to the church of Santa Susanna at the request of Camilla Peretti, the sister of Pope Sixtus V. His feast is celebrated on 26 May.

==Notes==

==References==


