[[Adnan Sarwar]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, People from Lahore, Pakistani racing drivers, 1978 births

 Adnan Sarwar (born in Lahore, Pakistan) is a Pakistani musician, producer, director, entrepreneur, and racing driver in various International series. He is currently one half of Lahore based pop/rock duo Club Caramel.
Medicine
Adnan formally trained to be a doctor of medicine graduating from Baqai Medical College, Karachi in 2005. He worked at Aga Khan Hospital before moving to Australia to further his medicine career. In 2006, Adnan returned to Pakistan to follow his passion for music and auto racing, giving up his career in medicine for good. At the time, he was working in the field of Emergency Medicine.
Music
Playing guitar and working as a session musician since 17 yrs of age.
Played in bands like Mekaal Hasan Band, Zeb n Haniya, The Trip.
Session guitar player for Ali Zafar, Ali Haider.
Formed own band 'Club Caramel' with singer/songwriter Kiran Chaudhry in 2007 currently doing concerts and working on an album.
Has written, composed and produced all of Club Caramel music including the hits Zindagi, Teray Bin and Deewana.
Made directorial debut with the music video of Deewana
Auto Racing
Adnan first drove for XtremeVelcoity Racing, a Pakistani team competing in the Nivea for Men 24 hours of Dubai 2006/07.Adnan then attended the Asia Racing Team Formula Renault Racing School. He was given the opportunity to test for A1 Team Pakistan at the Zhuhai International Circuit, China in 2007 using Formula Renault 2.0 Adnan participated in the first Pakistan National Karting Championship, winning the final round and taking 1 pole position and 2 fastest laps in the series. With his success he was offered a drive in the Formula Rolon racing series in India after a test session during the previous years at the Chennai Racing Track, and drove for Meco Motorsports, becoming to the Pakistani to compete in Formula Rolon finishing in 8th place in his first race. In January 2010, he participated in the Sodi World Series Karting Round 1 held in Dubai finishing in 9th  place and in March 2010 he took part in the next round of Sodi World Seris scoring 4th place out of 29 drivers which is the best finish for a Pakistani racing driver in an International karting race. Sarwar was also behind the motorsport company Racing Pakistan which held nationwide talent hunt programs in 2009 and organized annual karting championships before shutting down in 2010. In 2011, he was awarded Achievement in Motorsport Awards by sponsors Bank Alfalah and NJI Life.
Other
Trained Punjab Police, Motorway Police and City Traffic police drivers to improve their skills in chasing offenders on cars.

==References==

==External links==


