[[Possets]]

CATEGORIES: Perfume houses, Online retail companies of the United States

Possets is an online company selling perfume oils. Possets is owned by Fabienne Christenson, and is based in Cincinnati, Ohio, United States. It is known for creating sweet, or gourmand, fragrances, but does not limit itself to perfumes of that variety. The slogan for the company is Affordable Bottled Happiness.

==Background==

The daughter of a surgeon, Christenson grew up with exposure to both country and city environments, surrounded by a variety of scents from plants, flowers, herbs and other natural sources.Women in Business: Fabienne Christenson of Possets Perfume Retrieved June 15, 2009  This up-bringing fostered an early love for perfumes and fragrances, and she began exploring her own perfume-blending at a young age, even after being dissuaded from doing so due to limitations in her training and a ‘lack of a French background.’.Women in Business: Fabienne Christenson of Possets Perfume Retrieved June 16, 2009 Christenson graduated with a Bachelor of Fine Arts from the University of Cincinnati and a Bachelor of Science in Business Manufacturing from the University of Maryland, College Park, and also received a Master of Business Administration from Boston University.Fabienne Christenson Retrieved June 16, 2009 
Possets was first launched in 1992 and it debuted on the internet in 2006, with twelve fragrances, the first being Silver Violets, which Christenson calls a ‘top seller’ still.Chic Spotlight: Possets Perfume’s Fabienne Christenson Retrieved June 16, 2009 This perfume was also the first of a line of ‘silver’ flower perfumes.
Also in 2006, Christenson took the unusual step of offering her perfumes for sale not in boutiques, but in a hypermarket -- bigg’s—because of the high volume of customers and traffic that a typical grocery store has over a boutique.Bigg’s Puts Emphasis on Local Retrieved June 16, 2009
The plan paid off, and bigg’s began carrying Possets in several of its stores throughout Cincinnati, and Christenson has subsequently branched out into other supermarkets as well.

==Influences==

Possets is known for combining artistic influences and mixing it with a modern twist and a seasonal, often ‘foody’ bent. The Possets website prominently features artwork by Renaissance and Baroque masters. Possets’ scents are made to appeal to both men and women, with many of the perfumes being unisex in nature.  Christenson finds inspiration from a number of different sources in the creation of her scents including colors, science, psychology, religion, art history, historical personalities, seasons and holidays. As a business practice, Possets introduces a broad new selection of seasonal fragrances at least four times a year and often more frequently.

==Products==

Christenson’s perfume oils come in two types: Classic Possets and 100% Naturals Possets. Classic Possets are blended from man-made and natural components; the Naturals are created from entirely natural ingredients, no synthetics, or “nature identical”. Customers consider the low price and high quality of the Possets 100% naturals series as factors that set Christenson’s blends apart from others.
Possets currently produces and sells perfume oils in three sizes: 1/32 oz sample vials, called 'Poppets', 6-mL (cobalt) glass bottles and 10mL glass bottles . With an initial focus on sweet or dessert-inspired fragrances, Christenson has expanded upon that to include fragrances of all varieties, with some inspired by a few unique themes: 
Using her strong background in computers and technology,[tpl]citation needed|date=April 2012[/tpl] Christenson uses a variety of technological resources into her marketing, including her own videos, podcasts about perfumes, a newsletter, and other forms of media (Twitter and Facebook), to keep her customers informed and entertained about the world of perfumes. 
Possets is currently expanding its marketing to include retailers in the United Kingdom and the Far East, and the scents themselves are also available through other retailers on the internet.

==Company Core Values==

The composition of her perfume oils is of paramount concern to Christenson. The company claims to be committed to no-animal-testing, and Christenson ensures that her perfumes are free from toxic phthalates and other harmful substances Possets About Us Retrieved June 16, 2009
Christenson also uses her perfumes as a venue to help, and draw attention to, Cincinnati’s homeless cat population and rescue efforts for these cats, and has done so for three years.Perfumes are the Cat's Meow Retrieved Oct. 12, 2009 Possets is a sponsor of the Ohio Alleycat Rescue, and fragrances inspired by some of the feline residents at the shelter are created and released twice a year, in mid-autumn and early winter, with proceeds returning to the rescue. Once a ‘featured’ cat is adopted, the cat’s ‘fragrance’ is released once more for sale, and then permanently retired.

==Notes==

==External links==


