[[Madelyn Renee]]

CATEGORIES: Cornell University alumni, Juilliard School alumni, American sopranos, Year of birth missing (living people), Living people

Madelyn Renee is an American soprano formerly known as Madelyn Renée Monti. She was born in the later part of the 1900s in Boston. Renee had a significant relationship with late Italian tenor Luciano Pavarotti.New York Magazine - Book Review She currently lives in Milan, Italy.New York Times
Born in Boston, Massachusetts, soprano Madelyn Renee attended the Dana Hall School in Wellesley, Massachusetts and Cornell University and received her Bachelor's Degree from the Juilliard School in New York.  Ms. Renee made her debut singing Mimi in La Bohème with Luciano Pavarotti, a role she later performed with the tenor in numerous theatres. Ms. Renée sang frequently with Luciano Pavarotti, including concerts at Madison Square Garden and at the Hollywood Bowl in addition to appearing with the tenor during his 2002/2003 concert tour in the United States. 
The soprano has sung in major opera houses worldwide, notably  the Vienna Staatsoper,  the Opera Nationale and the Opera Comique in Paris, the Sydney Opera, the Opéra de Montecarlo, the Deutsche Oper in Berlin, Geneva’s Grand Théâtre, the San Francisco Opera, the Budapest Opera, the Metropolitan Opera and the New York City Opera and Milan’s Teatro alla Scala.
In addition to Milan’s La Scala, the artist has appeared at more than thirty opera houses in Italy among which those in Rome, Parma, Turin, Venice, Trieste, Bologna, Lucca, Genova, Verona, Bari and Palermo. Ms. Renée has performed under the baton of such distinguished conductors as Sir Georg Solti, Richard Bonynge, James Levine, Lorin Maazel, Luciano Berio, Daniel Barenboim, Alain Lombard, Gianandrea Gavazzeni, Gustav Kuhn, Evelino Pido, and John Mauceri.
The soprano’s repertoire includes La Bohème (Mimi and Musetta), Tosca, La Traviata, Otello, Simon Boccanegra, Falstaff (Alice Ford), Aida (Sacerdotessa), Pagliacci, Cavalleria Rusticana (Santuzza), Le Nozze di Figaro (Contessa) Don Giovanni (Zerlina e Donna Elvira) Zaide, Idomeneo, Cosi Fan Tutte (Despina), Nerone (Atte’), Tales of Hoffmann (Giulietta), Carmen (Micaela), A Midsummer Night’s Dream (Helena), The Merry Widow (Hanna Glawari and Valencienne), Faust (Siebel), La Belle Helene, La Perichole, Amelia al Ballo, Street Scene (Rose Maurrant) Die Fledermaus (Rosalinde) Elisir d’amore (Adina) Adriana Lecouvreur, The Mikado and was chosen to sing the leading role in the world premiere opera by Italian composer Marco Tutino, Dylan Dog.
In addition to her operatic repertoire, Ms. Renee performs numerous concerts during the year in Italy and abroad with program selections that range from Baroque to Schönberg. Ms. Renee has performed concerts with orchestras such as the RAI National Orchestra, the Rossini Opera Festival Orchestra, Milan’s Verdi Orchestra and Manchester's Halle Orchestra to name a few. The artist made her screen debut in Francis Ford Coppola’s Godfather III movie, singing and acting in the opera sequences from Cavalleria Rusticana. In Italy, Ms. Renee has hosted  a weekly television show for Italian audiences on classical music and opera called “Un Tocco di Classica”.   More recently, Ms. Renee was chosen by Dynamic Recording Company of Genova, to host the High Definition satellite broadcasts that transmit live opera performances to movie theatres throughout Europe. The soprano currently lives in Milan, Italy.

==See also==

==References==


