[[Tasseomancy (band)]]

CATEGORIES: Musical groups with year of establishment missing, Musical groups from Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canadian folk rock groups, All-female bands, Sibling musical duos, Jewish musical groups, Canadian musical duos, Musical groups from Toronto

Tasseomancy is a Canadian indie folk band from Toronto.  Originally formed in Halifax, Nova Scotia and centered around twin sisters Sari and Romy Lightman, the project started life under
the moniker Ghost Bees.Sled Island 2008: Ghost Bees. The Gauntlet, June 19, 2008. Born and raised in Toronto, the Lightman twins moved to Halifax to attend university and began performing there.Ghost Bees Don't Fight Like Tegan and Sara, Chart, April 18, 2008
The duo released their debut EP Tasseomancy on April 8, 2008, via Youth Club Records. Its cover is a photograph of the sisters' great-great grandmother Clara Chernos, a Russian Jewish tea-leaf reader who moved to Canada in the 19th century during the Russian pogroms.Ghost Bees, The Coast, April 10, 2008 The pair toured extensively in support of the record, including shows in the UK and Europe.
As the Ghost Bees project developed, new sounds and influences not heard on the original EP began to be incorporated, prompting a name change to Tasseomancy in 2010.Ghost Bees Change Name to Tasseomancy, Release Timber Timbre-produced Single Exclaim!, September 27, 2010 The twins recorded their debut full length under the new name that year, produced by fellow Toronto based musicians Taylor Kirk and Simon Trottier of the band Timber Timbre. They released a 7" single on friend Diamond Rings' boutique label Hype Lighter, and began performing in friend Katie Stelmanis' electronic outfit Austra as touring backing singers."Concert preview: Austra thrives on touring". Edmonton Journal, October 6, 2013.
The full-length debut album Ulalume was released on Out of this Spark/Turf Records in August 2011.
More recently, the band has added new members Johnny Spence on keyboards and Evan Cartwright on percussion."Tasseomancy". The Coast, October 18, 2012. They released a five-song EP, Braid. Wind Is Coming, in 2013 in advance of a new full-length album slated for release in 2014."Tasseomancy Prep Cassette EP Ahead of Upcoming Full-Length, Share New Song". Exclaim!, October 17, 2013.

==Discography==

==References==

==External links==


