[[Norman Betts]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, University of New Brunswick alumni, Queen's University alumni, Canadian accountants, Canadian educators, University of New Brunswick faculty, Progressive Conservative Party of New Brunswick MLAs, Members of the Executive Council of New Brunswick, People from Northumberland County, New Brunswick, Canadian people of English descent, Living people

Norman M. Betts (born April 1, 1954 in Doaktown, New Brunswick) is a Chartered Accountant, university professor, and former provincial politician.
Norman Betts graduated from the University of New Brunswick (UNB) in 1978 with a Bachelor of Business Administration degree and went to work for a firm of chartered accountants in Fredericton, New Brunswick with whom he remained associated until 1988. In 1991, he obtained a PhD in Management (accounting and finance) from Queen's University in Kingston, Ontario. The following year joined the Faculty of Business Administration at the University of New Brunswick as an associate professor where he held various responsibilities including Assistant Dean of the Master of Business Administration program.
In 1997, Norman Betts was an unsuccessful candidate for the leadership of the Progressive Conservative Party of New Brunswick in a contest won by Bernard Lord. The Party was voted in power in the 1999 New Brunswick general election and Betts won a seat in the Southwest Miramichi riding and was immediately appointed Minister of Finance. Betts held the position until October 9, 2001 when he was made the Minister of Business New Brunswick.
In the June 9, 2003 New Brunswick general election, Norman Betts lost his seat to Liberal Party candidate, Rick Brewer. Betts then returned to his teaching job at the University of New Brunswick. He has served on the Board of Directors of several companies including Tembec Inc. and on the Board of the Nature Conservancy for the Atlantic Canada region. In 2005, he was appointed to the Advisory Committee of the Atlantic Canada Chapter of the Institute of Corporate Directors.

==References==


