[[Sun Yaar Chill Maar]]

CATEGORIES: 2000s Indian television series, 2007 Indian television series debuts, Indian television series, Television shows set in Delhi

Sun Yaar Chill Maar is an Indian television comedy aired from Monday to Thursday at 9:00 PM on Bindass. The show is about five friends and their college life set in north campus of Delhi University. The show is more about pranks and madness rather than studies and books. 

==Plot==

The story revolves around five friends and their aspirations with life once they pass out from college. The situations they get into are collective and mostly solved by the cranial efforts of Manoj or Radhika.
Manoj is a pure archetype of middle-class north-Indian Agarwal. He is very down-to-earth and good with money-matters and his mathematical abilities turn out to be the life-saver many times. 
Radhika is bubbly Punjabi girl whose life ambition is to have her own Indian fast food franchise. Hence her whole life revolves around it. She is also the most practical of the group who comes out to be the most sorted out at the end of every situation.
Tarun, or Piddhi as he is known, is an aspiring rapper who also is a little weak for the fairer sex, especially the ones in the group. Many situations revolve around his ambition with the whole gang coming together to pitch in and make his dream a reality, for instance, collecting money for his first music album.
Diya is beautiful yet slow-witted Bengali girl who has the most high-rising ambition of making it to the Miss India finals and winning it. She is the heartthrob of the group and the campus and also is a traditional epitome of "beauty without brains". 
Omi is another quintessential Jat presence on the campus who is the biggest flirt and a sucker for girls. He is shown to be a bodybuilding Enfield-riding rural boy whose brain seems to only work if women are involved. Many instances see him using incomplete sentences which are filled with innuendos.

==Cast==

==External links==


