[[Syed Amir-uddin Kedwaii]]

CATEGORIES: Flag designers, 1973 deaths, 1901 births, Pakistani lawyers, Muhajir people, Aligarh Muslim University alumni

Syed Ameer ud din Kedwaii (1901 at Barabanki, United Province in India – 21 August 1973) was an active worker of Pakistan Movement and possess the distinction of proposing and designing the flag of Pakistan in 1946 which was accepted and appreciated by the founder of Pakistan,Encyclopedia of Pakistanika By Qsim Mehmood Quaid-e-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah.
Mr. Kedwaii completed his LLB from Aligarh University. 
He started his political career as an activist of Khilafat movement. He was a member of Khilafat Committee and was later made its Chief Leader. Maulana Shaukat ALi used to call him "My Lieutinent". After the termination of Khilafat Movement Maulana Shaukat Ali laid the foundation of Khuddam e Ka'aba Association of which Mr. Kedwaii was appointed President of United Province 2.
In 1922 Mr. Kedwaii, in the leadership of Allama Raghib Ahsan, created All India Muslim Youth League of which he was the Secretary General. There was a feeling of disappintment after the adoption of Nehru Report by All India Congress in 1928. In such circumstances, All India Muslim Conference was founded by the Indian Muslim whose president was Sir Agha Khan and Syed Ameer ud din Kedwaii remained earlier its member and later its Secretary 2.
Syed Ameer ud din Kedwaii joined All India Muslim League in 1936 and became the member of its Council in 1938. Syed Ameer ud din Kedwaii, along with his other companions in Aligarh, drafted "Pakistan Scheme" on the basis of which All India Muslim League developed "Pakistan Resolution" in 19402.
Syed Ameer ud din Kedwaii migrated to Pakistan in 1947 and settled in Lahore. He remained the faculty member of the Punjab University Law College and practiced law as a Senior Advocate. 
Syed Ameer ud din Kedwaii was one of the founding members of Jamiat ul Ulemae Pakistan and participated in its meetings as its Vice President.Syed Anwer Kedwaii, Senior Editor in Daily Jang. He is the son of Syed Ameer ud din Kedwaii.
He died in Lahore on 21 August 1973. Syed Ameer ud din Kedwaii had great spiritual affiliations with Data Ali Hajveri (RA)of Lahore . And because of this spiritual attachment, he remained in Lahore till his death.
In the honour of his services in Pakistan Movement Syed Ameer ud din Kedwaii was awarded with Pakistan Movement Gold Medal in 1991 by the Government of Pakistan.The journal of Introduction of Pakistan Movement Gold Medalists

==References==


