[[Lady Bird Johnson High School]]

CATEGORIES: North East Independent School District, High schools in San Antonio, Texas, Public high schools in Texas

Claudia Taylor "Lady Bird" Johnson High School is a Texas high school in the North East Independent School District named after U.S. First Lady Lady Bird Johnson. The school is located in the Stone Oak and Encino Park neighborhoods of Far North Central San Antonio.

==Facts==

"Children are apt to live up to what you believe of them." - Claudia Taylor Johnson
Claudia Taylor "Lady Bird" Johnson High School opened on August 28, 2008 for its inaugural year to address the growth and expansion in the north eastern communities of San Antonio, Texas. The school split from Ronald Reagan High School, its neighboring  school in the North East Independent School District. The school sits high on top of one of the tallest hills in Bexar County, and overlooks all of San Antonio.
The school mascot is the Jaguar, the school flower is the bluebonnet. In 2008 during the first year, the community planted bluebonnets and wildflowers around the campus, which bloom each year in honor of Claudia Taylor Johnson.
There is also a Johnson High School in Austin - named after Claudia Taylor Johnson's husband Lyndon - more widely known as "LBJ High School" built in 1975, that is also the "Jaguars".
Claudia Taylor Johnson High School is often referred to as "CTJ High School", based on both confusion with the Johnson High School in Austin and that the school's namesake was not fond of the nickname "Lady Bird".
Austin Mahone, Singer, known for "Banga Banga" and "Mmm Yeah (feat Pitbulll)", attended this school. He is now homeschooled.

==Facilities==

60 General Instruction classrooms,
20 Science classrooms (14 full labs, 2 modified labs, 4 classrooms),
19 Career and Technology classrooms,
16 Special Education classrooms,
3 Art classrooms,
3 JROTC classrooms and a separate JROTC Rifle Range and Quadrangle,
2 air-conditioned gymnasiums with complete support areas for Athletics,
Separate classrooms/areas for Band, Choir, Orchestra, Computer Science, Dance/Pep/Cheer, Photojournalism, Theatre Arts, and Speech,
Auditorium (seating approximately 750 students),
Cafeteria (seating approximately 750 students),
Courtyard with Amphitheatre,
Library/Media Center,
Separate Field/Practice Areas for Band, Tennis, Football, Baseball, Softball, and Soccer,
Approximately 1,000 parking spaces.

===School year===

Johnson uses a traditional U.S. school calendar, with classes beginning the last Monday of August and ending in late May or early June.  Students are given several holidays throughout the year (all federal holidays and one local holiday), in addition to two weeks off in December and January for holiday break and one week off in spring for spring break.  Beginning with the 2010-2011 school year, the school, along with the district, has replaced the high school A/B block schedule with a seven-period day.  The move to a seven-period day had been discussed by the district for several years as a cost-cutting measure. Many other districts similar in size to NEISD had previously made the change successfully. The district had previously maintained the block schedule because of the wide appeal to high school students and their families, but was no longer able to afford to do so.
The academic calendar is broken into two semesters (fall and spring) and further subdivided into nine-week grading periods, during which students are issued three-week progress reports and a report card at the end of the period, which contributes one quarter of their final grade in the class.
Classes are graded on a 100-point grading scale, and each grade the student earns over their four-year high school career contributes to their ultimate class ranking. Special classes are weighted based on their rigor; Advanced Placement classes are given the multiplier 1.29 (which the final graded is multiplied against) and Pre-Advanced Placement classes are given the multiplier 1.15. The official high school transcripts list the 100-point based GPA (with multipliers applied), instead of switching to a 4.0/5.0 scale.
NEISD does not award competitive honors to students - any student earning a GPA of 100 or higher "ties" for the position of class valedictorian. In some schools, this can lead to a very large number of class valedictorians (as many as 100) as a result of large graduating class sizes and the extra weight given to advanced placement classes.  Cum laude, magna cum laude and summa cum laude awards are given based on the students' 100-point scale GPA upon graduation.

==External links and references==


