[[SC Sélestat]]

CATEGORIES: Football clubs in France, Association football clubs established in 1912, Sélestat, Football clubs from former German territories, Sport in Alsace, 1912 establishments in France

SC Sélestat is a French football from the city of Sélestat in Alsace, France. It was established in 1912 as the German club SV Schlettstadt in what was at the time  Schlettstadt, Elsaß in Germany.
Following the Franco-Prussian War, the territories of Alsace and parts of Lorraine were ceded to Germany as Elsaß and Lothringen.  SV was formed out of the merger of predecessor sides Schlettstadter Fußball-Klub 1906 and Fußball-Klub Sport Schlettstadt and played as an undistinguished local side.Grüne, Hardy (2001). Vereinslexikon. Kassel: AGON Sportverlag ISBN 3-89784-147-9 The disputed territories once again became part of France after World War I and Schlettstadt joined that country's football competition in 1920 as Sportclub Sélestat in the regional top-flight Division d'Honneur Alsace. The team won titles there in 1920 and 1922 and participated in the opening round of the Coupe de France de football in 1920-21. They went on to make other appearances in the opening round of the tournament through the 20s and 30s.
The region was re-conquered by Nazi Germany early in World War II and SV Schlettstadt resumed its former place in German football as part of the first division Gauliga Unterelsass in 1940. The team finished the season in last place and was relegated, but quickly returned to the top flight. They made a losing appearance in the qualifying round of play for the Tschammerspokal, predecessor of today's DFB-Pokal (German Cup) in 1941, and then performed poorly in regular season competition over the next two years. The 1944-45 season of what was now the Gauliga Oberelsass was never started as Allied armies began their advance into Germany. The club resumed play in French competition after the war as SC Sélestat.
SC remains active today and has departments for badminton, bowling, handball, swimming, and volleyball. As of the 2007-08 season, the footballers play in Promotion A, Group D, of the Ligue d' Alsace - Bas Rhin (IX). With three games to play, the club sits on last place.Ligue d' Alsace, Promotion A, Group D - Table accessed: 21 May 2008 The club's handball team has become prominent nationally.

==Honours==

as SC Sélestat

==External links==

==References==


