[[Credit Abuse Resistance Education]]

CATEGORIES: United States bankruptcy law, Financial Literacy, Financial Education

Credit Abuse Resistance Education (CARE) is a national program founded by the U.S. Bankruptcy Court, WDNY and the Bankruptcy Committee of the Monroe County Bar Association.  It was founded in 2002 by U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Chief Judge John C. Ninfo, II (retired).
CARE is a free financial literacy initiative that makes experienced members of the Bankruptcy Community available to teach the importance of financial education. These presentations are the perfect supplement to any financial literacy program offered by you or your school, especially to any unit on consumer credit, and they can be made during individual classroom periods or to larger student groups, including senior assemblies. CARE's primary target is high school seniors and college freshmen who are most at risk because, as hungry consumers, they are aggressively marketed by the credit card industry at a time when they carry a very low Financial I.Q.
CARE has a presence in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. The American media has dubbed this program a "scared straight" credit program for students. CARE is honored and excited to be a national partner of the Jump$tart Coalition and a member of the National Financial Education Network. CARE is grateful to NextStep Magazine for media support, and to the National Conference of Bankruptcy Judges, National Association of Bankruptcy Trustees, the United States Trustee Program and the Federal Judicial Center for their financial support.
The CARE web site (www.care4yourfuture.org) supplements the live presentations with free downloads in the form of handouts, videos, PowerPoint presentations, games and more for free public use. Our CARE Locator Map is powered by Google to make finding a contact person near you as easy as possible. You can also schedule a presentation in your area or help us start a new CARE Program where you live.
CARE Advisory Board
Judge John C. Ninfo, II; U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Western District of New York - retired
Paul Groschadl; 
Woods Oviatt Gilman, LLP
Joe Schorer; 
Kirkland & Ellis LLP
Allen Guon; 
Shaw Gussis Fishman Glantz Wolfson & Towbin LLC
CARE Judicial Advisory Board
David D. Bird; 
Clerk, U.S. Bankruptcy Court, District of Delaware
Brad Bolton; 
Clerk, U.S. Bankruptcy Court, District of Colorado
Judge Sidney B. Brooks;
U.S. Bankruptcy Court, District of Colorado
Judge Carla E. Craig ; 
U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Eastern District of New York
Judge Dennis R. Dow ; 
U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Western District of Missouri
Judge A. Benjamin Goldgar; 
U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Northern District of Illinois, Eastern Division
Judge Jeffery P. Hopkins; 
U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Southern District of Ohio
Judge Laurel Myerson Isicoff; 
U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Southern District of Florida
Judge Margaret M. Mann; 
U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Southern District of California
Judge Catherine Peek McEwen; 
U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Middle District of Florida
Judge C. Ray Mullins; 
U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Northern District of Georgia
Judge Pamela Pepper; 
U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Eastern District of Wisconsin
Judge Barry Russell; 
U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Central District of California
Judge Paul R. Warren; 
U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Western District of New York

==External links==


