[[Puru (artist)]]

CATEGORIES: Republic of China painters, Republic of China calligraphers, Humboldt University of Berlin alumni, House of Aisin Gioro, Artists from Beijing, Qing dynasty imperial princes, 1896 births, 1963 deaths, Taiwanese people of Manchu descent, Taiwanese painters, Taiwanese calligraphers, Republic of China politicians from Beijing, Politicians of the Republic of China on Taiwan, Manchu politicians, National Taiwan Normal University faculty, Tunghai University faculty, Educators from Beijing

Puru (August 30, 1896 - November 18, 1963), also known as Pu Xinyu, was a painter and calligrapher. He was a member of the Manchu Aisin Gioro clan, the ruling house of the Qing Dynasty. He was a cousin to Puyi, the final ruler of the Qing Dynasty and last Emperor of China. It is speculated that Puru would have succeeded to the Chinese imperial throne if Puyi and the Qing government was not overthrown after the 1911 Xinhai Revolution.English Biography of Pu Ru Puru was reputed to be as talented as the artist Chang Dai-chien.

==Biography==

Puru was born of the Manchu Aisin Gioro clan as the second son of Zaiying (載瀅), a son of Yixin, Prince Gong. His mother was Lady Xiang (項氏), a secondary spouse of Zaiying.
Puru was once selected as a potential candidate to succeed the Guangxu Emperor but his cousin Puyi was eventually chosen instead. Being a prince, he was a student at the University of Berlin. After he returned from Europe, he retreated into the Western Mountains, where he spent many years in Jietai Monastery to concentrate on his studies. His courtesy name was "Xinyu", so he changed his name to Pu Xinyu (Wade–Giles: P'u Hsin-yu) after the fall of the Qing Dynasty in 1911.
In 1947, Puru was appointed by Chiang Kai-shek as Manchu representative of the Constitutional National Assembly. He was strongly against Puyi's cooperation with the Empire of Japan, foresaw the unrest in China and fled to Taiwan in the same year as Chang Kai-shek did.Biography of Pu Ru
In Taiwan, Puru made a living by selling paintings and calligraphy works during the first months of his arrival in Taipei. He lived in a Japanese style house on Linyi Street in Taipei that the government provided for him. He was appointed in October 1949 as a professor of the Fine Arts Department of the National Taiwan Normal University. In 1959, he held a two weeks long art exhibition in the National Museum of History with 318 works on display.
Puru died in 1963 and was buried in the Yangmingshan No. 1 Public Cemetery in Taipei. His cousin Jin Pucong (King Pu-tsung) was a Secretary-General of the Chinese Nationalist Party of Taiwan.

==Family==

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


