[[Craig B. Lloyd]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Recipients of the Legion of Merit

Captain Craig Barkley Lloyd was commissioned into the United States Coast Guard in 1984 at Officer Candidate School in Yorktown, Virginia, and is the former Captain of the United States Coast Guard High Endurance Cutter vessel USCGC Munro. (June 2006 - July 2009).  During Lloyd's command, the vessel changed homeports from Alameda California to its current location of Kodiak, Alaska as of September 4, 2007.  Lloyd commanded Munro in the search and rescue of the crab fishing vessel Ocean Challenger, in the midst of the Bering Sea; which was documented by the Deadliest Catch reality TV show on the Discovery Channel. He also was the On Scene Commander during the Alaska Ranger search and rescue case where 47 crew members abandoned ship during a Bering Sea winter storm. 42 fisherman were saved by two helicopters, the Munro, and another fishing boat in the area. Lloyd also served as the Deputy Chief of Staff in downtown New Orleans coordinating the federal government response and has been recognized with the Legion of Merit, four Meritorious Service Medals, the Combat Action Ribbon, Army Achievement Medal, and Navy Commendation Medal.
Captain Lloyd completed his Coast Guard career as the Chief Operating Officer for the Coast Guard's far-northern latitudes, encompassing 3.8 million square miles of ocean and 33,000 miles of coastline, including some of the most treacherous waters in the world, with oversight responsibilities for the operations of the Coast Guard’s 2nd largest aviation command, a 2nd smaller aviation command, technical support staff and manages $14 million annual budget.  During his last assignment, he orchestrated the winter delivery of fuel to Nome by the Russian Tanker Renda, escorted by Coast Guard Cutter Healy.  Additionally, he was the project manager for the seizure of the rat-infested pirate fishing vessel Bangun Perkasa.
He has earned two Master's Degrees: National Security and Strategic Studies from the Naval War College in Newport Rhode Island as well as a Masters in Organizational Management from the University of Phoenix. His undergraduate degree is in Social Science from St. Mary's College of Maryland.http://www.usgc.mil/pacarea/munro/MeetCommand.html
http://www.stabenow.com/category/munro
He now serves as the President and General Manager of Alaska Clean Seas, a non-profit oil spill response cooperative whose current membership includes oil and pipeline companies that engage in or intend to undertake oil and gas exploration, development, production or pipeline transport activities on the North Slope of Alaska.

==References==


