[[Stone Harbor School District]]

CATEGORIES: New Jersey District Factor Group FG, School districts in Cape May County, New Jersey, Stone Harbor, New Jersey

The Stone Harbor School District is a community public school district that serves students in kindergarten through eighth grade from Stone Harbor, in Cape May County, New Jersey, United States. 
Starting with the 2011-12 school year, in an agreement with the Avalon School District, public school students in grades K-4 from both communities will attend school in Stone Harbor while all students in grades 5-8 will attend school in Avalon.Avalon Elementary School 2011 School Report Card, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed June 6, 2012. "The district has entered into a 'send-receive' agreement with the neighboring district on the island to consolidate the instructional programs in the two schools. Stone Harbor will house the K-4 programs for both districts and Avalon will house grades 5-8 for the 2011-2012 school year."
Students in public school for grades 9–12 attend Middle Township High School in Cape May Court House, as part of a sending/receiving relationship with the Middle Township Public Schools.Middle Township High School 2011 School Report Card Narrative, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed June 6, 2012. "Middle Township High School is a four-year, accredited, comprehensive high school situated in central Cape May County. The school serves the communities of Middle Township, Dennis Township, Avalon, and Stone Harbor."
As of the 2009-10 school year, the district's one school had an enrollment of 61 students and 12.0 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 5.08.District information for the Stone Harbor School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed June 6, 2012.
The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "FG", the fourth highest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed October 27, 2009.

==School==

Stone Harbor School had a student body of 61 students in the 2009-10 school year.Stone Harbor Elementary School, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed June 6, 2012.  

==Administration==

Core members of the district's administration are:Cape May County School Directory, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed November 5, 2009.

==References==

==External links==


