[[Woodlynne School District]]

CATEGORIES: New Jersey District Factor Group B, School districts in Camden County, New Jersey

The Woodlynne School District is a community public school district that serves students in pre-Kindergarten through eighth grade from Woodlynne, in Camden County, New Jersey, United States.  
As of the 2007-2008 school year, the district's one school has an enrollment of 459 students and 24.0 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 19.1.District information for the Woodlynne Borough School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed November 5, 2009.
The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "B", the second lowest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed October 27, 2009.
Public school students in grades 9-12 from Woodlynne attend Collingswood High School in neighboring Collingswood, as part of a sending/receiving relationship with the Collingswood Public Schools.Collingswood High School, South Jersey magazine. Accessed November 18, 2007. "Collingswood High School serves about 850 students in grades nine through twelve from the Collingswood, Oaklyn, and Woodlynne school districts"

==School==

Woodlynne Elementary School had an enrollment of 459 students in the 2007-08 school year.Data for the Woodlynne School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed December 12, 2009.

==Administration==

Core members of the district's administration are:Woodlynne School Board Members, Woodlynne School District. Accessed May 22, 2008.Camden County School Directory, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed November 5, 2009.

==References==

==External links==


