[[Phillips Foods, Inc. and Seafood Restaurants]]

CATEGORIES: Seafood companies, Fish processing, Seafood restaurants in the United States, Restaurant chains in the United States

Phillips Foods, Inc. and Seafood Restaurants is a family owned and operated seafood company in the mid-Atlantic region, United States. Phillips Foods, Inc., seafood manufacturers as well as restaurateurs, specializes in crab meat and crab cakes, and produces a line of fish and shrimp products. Headquartered in Baltimore, Maryland, the company is attempting to expand its global presence with regional headquarters and a new seafood processing facility in Thailand.Dash, Julekah: "Phillips to Spend $21M to Beef Up Seafood Operation in Thailand," Baltimore Business Journal, Retrieved: January 11, 2008  Phillips Seafood Restaurants have casual dining, buffet service and carryout.

==History==

The company started in 1916 when Augustus E. Phillips established the company's first seafood processing plant on Hooper's Island in Maryland’s Chesapeake Bay. The A.E. Phillips packing plant processed seafood from many of the watermen in the region. Then, in 1956 after a surplus season of crabs, son Brice Phillips and wife Shirley opened the first “crab shack” in Ocean City, Maryland. Brice and Shirley began building a new dining room each year at Phillips Crab House until it finally seated 1400 people.
Phillips Seafood Restaurants currently has 19 Phillips Seafood Restaurants, all located along the eastern coast of the United States.

==Crab manufacturing==

Phillips is the world’s largest manufacturer of crab meat, and employs over 10,000 people worldwide. The company's crab processing facilities are found all over the world, including the United States, Southeast Asia, and Latin America. Thirteen plants are located worldwide. In 1990, Phillips opened crab processing facilities in Southeast Asia to ensure a year-round supply of swimming crab meat for their restaurants. Phillips Foods has regional sales offices across the United States while global sales locations exist in the United Kingdom, Hong Kong, and Australia. While most of the seafood production goes to the United States, the company has a growing market in Asia, Europe, and Australia "Phillips Foods outlines plans for new acility in Thailand," Seafax, Retrieved: January 15, 2008

==Products==

Known primarily for their crab cakes, the company has a vast array of other products - packaged and sold under Phillips Seafood brand label - including crab meat, appetizers, fish, seafood cakes, soups, entrées, and sauces. Phillips’ created the Asian Rhythms brand and product line offering Far Eastern appetizers, soups and entrées. Although the company's reputation was built on its origins as a producer of Maryland blue crab, it now markets primarily crab from Southeast Asia.http://www.washingtoncitypaper.com/cover/2005/cover0715.html

==Awards and honors==

Phillips has been recognized by regional publications, industry journals, and local and national business associations.  These recognitions include:

==Sustainability==

Phillips has defined a Corporate Responsibility Initiative that focuses on Environmental Issues and Resource Management, Social Responsibility, and Economic Development."Phillips Takes Lead," Restaurant Hospitality, April 2008 Phillips works together with partners throughout the world to invest in the people and infrastructure of welcoming countries.  The company established a Division of Aquaculture and Sustainability to make sure their purchasing decisions are good for the environment and are not jeopardizing future supplies."Green Foods: Organic, Local, Sustainable," Restaurant Hospitality, April 2008  Also, the company helped create the Indonesian Crab Producers Association which teaches fishermen sustainable methods.  They are a founding member of  National Fisheries Institute’s Economic Integrity Platform and started a Build-A-Boat program providing boats to local waterman after the 2004 tsunami in Asia.

==See also==

==References==


