[[TAGIBook]]

CATEGORIES: Information and communication technologies for development, Organisations based in Jordan

The TAGIBook initiative, based in Jordan, aims to introduce an affordable basic computer for every Arab citizen, in an effort to increase the level of computer literacy in the Arab region, bridge the digital divide between the Arab countries and the developed world, and build sufficient ICT skills and capacity to boost the economic standing of the region and steer it towards a knowledge-based and innovation driven society. TAGIBook initiative targets the basic Arab user whether at home, school, university, urban or rural regions.
The TAGIBook initiative, along with other social TAG projects such as community Knowledge Society (TAGKS); aims at increasing literacy levels throughout the Arab world and providing the target population with education and future opportunities based on hard work and merit.
The value of this project is that it does not resemble traditional computer projects, which are present in a number of Arab countries, the difference is that this project specifically addresses the needs of Arab communities, and merges four main components: hardware, software, connectivity, and training. These characteristics result in making this computer project unique in the world. 

==Objectives==

The hardware system will be manufactured at low cost to be affordable for Arab communities. This is important since the current prices of hardware, available in the Arab markets, surpass the purchasing power for many Arab citizens. 
The system to be developed will utilize free basic applications with open source code. It will work towards adopting a package of free applications and supporting their Arabization to meet the local needs.
TAGorg will also provide connectivity solution to the educational institutions in order to connect the low cost computers to the centralized databases and benefit from e-learning solutions. 
In addition, training sessions will be offered based on the free software and e-learning solutions adopted by the organization. This will help the new emerging Arab generations to benefit from the most advanced learning tools and techniques.
In an area of the world experiencing radical and unprecedented change, TAGorg is well aware of all aspects of the economic, educational, and environmental development, including the social and regulatory factors governing them by:

==References==

==External links==


