[[Highlands School District]]

CATEGORIES: Highlands, New Jersey, New Jersey District Factor Group CD, School districts in Monmouth County, New Jersey

The Highlands School District is a community public school district that serves students in Kindergarten through sixth grade in Highlands, in Monmouth County, New Jersey, United States.
As of the 2008-09 school year, the district's one school had an enrollment of 167 students and 19.1 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 8.7.District information for the Highlands Borough School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed March 2, 2011.
The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "CD", the sixth highest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed October 27, 2009.
For grades 7-12, students attend Henry Hudson Regional High School, a comprehensive six-year high school and regional public school district that serves students from both Atlantic Highlands and Highlands.About Henry Hudson, Henry Hudson Regional High School. Accessed May 21, 2008. "This school district serves the towns of Atlantic Highlands and Highlands and students in grades seven through twelve." The district served a total enrollment of 437 students in the 2008-09 school year.Henry Hudson Regional High School, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed March 2, 2011.

==School==

Highlands Elementary School had an enrollment of 167 students in the 2008-09 school year.Data for Highlands School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed March 2, 2011.

==Administration==

Core members of the district's administration are:

==References==

==External links==


