[[Selected Poems of Henry Ames Blood]]

CATEGORIES: 1901 books, American poetry collections

Selected Poems of Henry Ames Blood is a collection of poetry by American poet Henry Ames Blood. While his verse had been widely anthologized during his lifetime, this volume was the only book devoted solely to his verse. It was published in hardcover in Washington, D.C. by The Neale Publishing Company in 1901. It was reprinted in paperback by the Kessinger Publishing Company in September, 2007.
The book collects thirty poems by the author, selected by his widow Mary M. Blood as a retrospective sampling of his life's work. The source citations are as in the collection; where data is incomplete the original publications have been consulted where possible, and the missing data supplied in brackets.

==Contents==

==Reception==

"A dainty memorial volume ... contents gathered from the Century Magazine, Scribner's Independent and other periodicals to which Mr. Blood was a highly appreciated occasional poetic contributor. The work of selection has been made with taste and judgment and the little volume is handsomely made." Cleveland Plain Dealer, March 9, 1902, p. 25.
"Selected Poems by Henry Ames Blood is a book published by the Neale Company, Washington, D. C. It is attractive in appearance, and the verses, many of which are reprints from the best magazines, have strength and a real poetic beauty of expression. The last one in the book, "Ad Astra," appeared first in the Century Magazine, and is spirited and fine. There are thirty poems, some long, some short, but all worthy of consideration by lovers of poetry." Overland Monthly, v. 39, no. 5, May 1902, p. 920.
"In the 'Selected Poems' of Henry Ames Blood may be found many fresh and cheery bits of verse, most of which have already been published in literary journals, but whose collection in permanent form is not amiss. They make no effort to soar into the heights of poetry, but are picturesque and spirited, with here and there a touch of genial humor." The Era, v. 10, no. 2, August 1902, p. 222.

==External links==


