[[Manuel de la Cámara y Libermoore]]

CATEGORIES: Spanish admirals, People of the Spanish–American War

Manuel de la Cámara y Libermoore (or Livermoore) was a rear admiral of the Spanish Navy during the Spanish-American War.
Immediately after the outbreak of the Spanish-American War in April 1898, the Spanish Navy ordered major units of its fleet to concentrate at Cadiz to form the 2nd Squadron, under the command of Rear Admiral Manuel de la Cámara.The Spanish-American War Centennial Website: Pelayo One mission of the squadron, in the absence of any other direction, was to guard the Spanish coast against raids by the United States Navy.
On 1 May 1898, the Spanish Navy's squadron in the Philippines under Rear Admiral Patricio Montojo y Pasaron was destroyed by the U.S. Navy's Asiatic Squadron under Commodore George Dewey in the Battle of Manila Bay.  The Spanish Ministry of Marine began to consider options for redressing the situation there.  Two of Spain's most powerful warships, the battleship Pelayo and the brand-new armored cruiser Emperador Carlos V were not available when the war began, the former undergoing reconstruction in a French shipyard and the latter not yet delivered from her builders.  But both were rushed into service and assigned to Cámara's squadron.Nofi, p. 58
On 15 June 1898, de la Cámara finally received his orders: He was to sail immediately for the Philippines, escorting a convoy carrying 4,000 Spanish Army troops for reinforcement of the Philippines, and destroy Dewey's squadron there.Nofi. p.168 His orders directed him to depart Cadiz with Pelayo, Emperador Carlos V, auxiliary cruisers Patriota and Rapido, destroyers Audaz, Osado, and Proserpina, and transports Buenos Aires, Panay, Alfonso XII, and Antonio Lopez, and four colliers.  He was to detach Alfonso XII and Antonio Lopez near Gibraltar after dark so that they could proceed to the Caribbean, then take the rest of his force to the Philippines via Gibraltar, Port Said, Suez, Socotra (at which point the colliers were to be detached to return to Cartagena), the Laccadive Islands, and Ceylon. After that, he was told to coal either along the coast of Sumatra or in Singapore or Batavia, and then either make an optional stop at Labuan, Borneo, or proceed directly to Mindanao.  Once in the Philippines, he was to disperse (to places such as Balabac, Jolo, Basilan, and Zamboanga) or concentrate his squadron as best he saw fit to ensure safe arrival of the troops and then deal with Dewey's squadron.Cervera's papers, p. 151-154
de la Cámara sortied from Cadiz on 16 June 1898,Nofi, p. 273 passed Gibraltar on 17 June 1898Nofi, p. 168 (first detaching Alfonso XII and Antonio Lopez for their independent voyages to the Caribbean as ordered), and arrived at Port Said on 26 June 1898.Cervera's papers, p. 154 There he requested permission to transship coal, which the Egyptian government finally denied on 30 June 1898 out of concern for Egyptian neutrality. Working behind the scenes, the  U.S. acting vice counsul to Egypt, diplomat Ethelbert Watts, dissuaded Egyptian and British authorities from permitting de la Cámara to access coal owned by Spain, while at the same time acquiring a lien over coal available in Suez from other sources.French Ensor Chadwick, "The relations of the United States and Spain: the Spanish-American War," Volume 2, p. 388 (1911).
By the time de la Cámara's squadron arrived at Suez on 5 July 1898,Nofi, p. 282 the squadron of Vice Admiral Pascual Cervera y Topete had been annihilated in the Battle of Santiago de Cuba, freeing up the U.S. Navy's heavy forces from the blockade of Santiago de Cuba.  Fearful for the security of the Spanish coast, the Spanish Ministry of Marine recalled Cámara's squadron on 7 July 1898.Nofi, p. 283 de la Cámara departed Suez on 11 July 1898 for Spain, where the 2nd Squadron was dissolved on 25 July 1898.

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==


