[[Quantum dissipation]]

CATEGORIES: Condensed matter physics, Statistical mechanics, Quantum mechanics

Quantum Dissipation is the branch of physics that studies the quantum analogues of the process of irreversible loss of energy observed at the classical level. Its main purpose is to derive the laws of classical dissipation from the framework of quantum mechanics. It shares many features with the subjects of quantum decoherence and quantum theory of measurement.

==Models of Quantum Dissipation==

The main problem to address dissipation at the quantum level is the way to envisage the mechanism of irreversible loss of energy. Quantum mechanics usually deal with the Hamiltonian formalism, where the total energy of the system is a conserved quantity. So in principle it would not be possible to describe dissipation in this framework.
The idea to overcome this issue consists on splitting the total system in two parts: the quantum system where dissipation occurs, and a so-called environment or bath where the energy of the former will flow towards. The way both systems are coupled depends on the details of the microscopic model, and hence, the description of the bath. To include an irreversible flow of energy (i.e., to avoid Poincaré recurrences in which the energy eventually flows back to the system), requires that the bath contain an infinite number of degrees of freedom. Notice that by virtue of the principle of universality, it is expected that the particular description of the bath will not affect the essential features of the dissipative process, as far as the model contains the minimal ingredients to provide the effect.
The simplest way to model the bath was proposed by Feynman and Vernon in a seminal paper from 1963.R. P. Feynman and F. L. Vernon, Ann. Phys. (N. Y.) 24, 118 (1963) In this description the bath is a sum of an infinite number of harmonic oscillators, that in quantum mechanics represents a set of free bosonic particles.

===The Caldeira-Leggett or Harmonic bath model===

In 1981 Amir Caldeira and Anthony J. Leggett proposed a simple model to study in detail the way dissipation arises from a quantum point of view.A. Caldeira and A. J. Leggett, Influence of dissipation on quantum tunneling in macroscopic systems, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 46, p. 211, 1981 It describes a quantum particle in one-dimension coupled to a bath. The Hamiltonian reads:
To provide a good description of the dissipation mechanism, a relevant quantity is the bath spectral function, defined as follows:
where:
is a kernel which characterizes the effective force that affects the motion of the particle in the presence of dissipation. For so-called Markovian baths, which do not keep memory of the interaction with the system, and for Ohmic dissipation, the equations of motion simplify to the classical equations of motion of a particle with friction:
Hence, one can see how Caldeira-Leggett model fulfills the goal of getting classical dissipation from the quantum mechanics framework. The Caldeira-Leggett model has been used to study quantum dissipation problems since its introduction in 1981, being extensively used as well in the field of quantum decoherence.

===The dissipative two-level system===

The model has many applications. In quantum dissipation it is used as a simple model to study the dynamics of a dissipative particle confined in a double-well potential. In the context of Quantum Computation it represents a qubit coupled to an environment, which can produce decoherence. In the study of amorphous solids it provides the basis of the standard theory to describe their thermodynamic properties.
The dissipative two-level systems represents also a paradigm in the study of quantum phase transitions. For a critical value of the coupling to the bath it shows a phase transition from a regime in which the particle is delocalized among the two positions to another in which it is localized in only one of them. The transition is of Kosterlitz-Thouless kind, as can be seen by deriving the Renormalization group flow equations for the hopping term.

==See also==

==References==


