[[One Dark Night]]

CATEGORIES: 1983 horror films, 1983 films, American films, English-language films, Films shot in Los Angeles, California, Independent films, Films directed by Tom McLoughlin

One Dark Night is an American horror film starring Meg Tilly and E.G. Daily. It was released in theaters in 1983 but was filmed two years earlier. It was released by Comworld Pictures. The final fifteen minutes of the film are the most gruesome, giving this work its claim to 1980s horror movie fame. Unlike many genre films of the era, One Dark Night displays no blood and was rated PG. 

==Plot==

Six girls have been found murdered in the apartment of famed Russian occultist, Karl Raymarseivich Raymar, and police cannot explain it. When Raymar's body was lifted onto a stretcher, bolts of electricity shot out from his fingers. Not even his estranged daughter Olivia McKenna (Melissa Newman) or her husband Allan (Adam West) knows what happened until they meet Samuel Dockstader (Donald Hotton), a feature writer for "The World of the Occult". Dockstader, once a friend to Raymar, explains that Raymar was a psychic vampire who gained great powers of telekinesis by kidnapping young girls, terrorizing them, and feeding off the bioenergy they produced. Allan does not believe him, but Dockstader shows Olivia a set of photographs to demonstrate how bioenergy works and gives her an audiotape that outlines his findings; Olivia believes him.
High school student Julie Wells (Meg Tilly) wants nothing more than to be one of "The Sisters," a club of three snobby high school girls—Carol (Robin Evans), Leslie (E.G. Daily), and Kitty (Leslie Speights). Unfortunately, Carol is the ex-girlfriend of Julie's new boyfriend Steve (David Mason Daniels), and is jealous. She intends to get back at Steve and Julie by making Julie spend a night alone in a mausoleum, unaware that Raymar's body was just entombed there. That evening, Julie is dropped off by two of the "Sisters", Carol and Kitty, as Leslie had refused to accompany them on the plan. Julie explores the mausoleum and sets up her sleeping bag, unaware of the cracks that appear around Raymar's vault.
Carol and Kitty, hoping to scare Julie, sneak back into the mausoleum with some Halloween masks and props. They succeed in frightening Julie, who locks herself in the chapel. Suddenly, the walls shake, windows explode, and doors slam shut. Thinking this is the result of Julie being scared, Carol and Kitty decide to leave. When vaults open, coffins slide out, and the dead rise and surround them, Kitty and Carol are buried under a mound of corpses and suffocate.
Meanwhile, Steve has gone over to Julie's house and found her missing. He catches up with Leslie, who reluctantly tells Steve about Julie's initiation, and Steve angrily heads over to stop it. At the same time, Olivia dashes over to the mausoleum after learning about her father's powers and the possibility that she might also possess them. Back at the mausoleum, Raymar has broken out of his coffin and is controlling the doors and cadavers with his psychic powers. Steve breaks in and finds a hysterical Julie. They become surrounded by cadavers that advance toward them. Steve tries to fight the cadavers, but they knock him out. Raymar pulls a dazed Julie closer to him just as Olivia arrives. She tries out her powers on her father, but he is stronger. As a last effort, Olivia takes her compact and reflects the bolts from Raymar's eyes back on him. Raymar and the cadavers disintegrate, and Julie, Steve and Olivia are safe.

==Also known as==

==DVD release==

Shriek Show has decided to release One Dark Night as a double-disc special edition. The first disc features the film's theatrical cut; the 1:85:1 anamorphic widescreen transfer is serviceable; some print damage is noticeable, especially during the darker night scenes. Director Tom McLoughlin and co-writer Michael Hawes offer an audio commentary. The main extra on the second disc is the alternate director's cut, entitled A Night in the Crypt. Presented in fullframe 1:33:1, this version was a work print only aired on Bahamian TV in 1981 as a tax shelter for the producers.

==External links==


