[[Blanca Varela]]

CATEGORIES: 1926 births, 2009 deaths, People from Lima, Peruvian people of Galician descent, Peruvian women poets, Surrealist writers, 20th-century women writers, 20th-century poets

Blanca Leonor Varela Gonzáles (10 August 1926  – 12 March 2009) was a Peruvian poet.

==Biography==

Varela was born in Lima.
Her mother was a composer who authored many famous creole waltzes.  She studied at the National University of San Marcos where she met other future writers such as Sebastián Salazar Bondy, Javier Sologuren, Jorge Eduardo Eielson, and her future husband, the artist and sculptor Fernando de Szyszlo with whom she has two children. In 1949 they travelled to Paris where she met Octavio Paz, a key figure in her life, who introduced her to the artists and intellectuals there, such as André Breton, Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, Henri Michaux, Alberto Giacometti and Fernand Léger, among others; and also other Latin American authors who lived in France at that time, for example Carlos Martínez Rivas. Paz persuaded her to publish her poetry, and in the preface to the first edition of her debut book Ese puerto existe (1959) he wrote: "At that time we all used to sing. And among those songs you could hear a lonesome song of one Peruvian girl: Blanca Varela. The most secret, timid and natural of them all." Octavio Paz Later Varela lived in Florence and Washington, D.C.  In 1962 she returned to Lima and since then traveled mainly to US, Spain and France. 
She was awarded the Medalla de Honor by the Peruvian National Institute of Culture, the Premio Octavio Paz de Poesía y Ensayo (Octavio Paz Prize for poetry and essays), the Premio Internacional de Poesía Ciudad de Granada Federico García Lorca (City of Granada Federico García Lorca International Poetry Prize, 2006; as the first woman ever), and the Premio Reina Sofía de Poesía Iberoamericana (Queen Sophia's Prize for Iberoamerican Poetry, 2007).

==Poetry==

Her poems are surrealist in the way that they try to express the world in an innocent way from the inner space's point of view, yet they cannot prevent cruelty from coming into them from the outside world. This attempt to find perfection with every new poem has, according to Mario Vargas Llosa who used Varela's poem Ternera acosada por tábanos (Calf tortured by horse-flies)Ternera acosada por tábanos as a notable example of her philosophy, "the quality of heroes from ancient myths who die, but fight to the very last moment anyway." 
Her books have been translated into English, German, Italian, Portuguese, Russian and Czech.
Collections of poetry

==References==

==External links==


