[[Somerdale School District]]

CATEGORIES: New Jersey District Factor Group CD, School districts in Camden County, New Jersey

The Somerdale School District is a community public school district that serves students in Pre-Kindergarten through eighth grade from Somerdale, in Camden County, New Jersey, United States.
As of the 2010–11 school year, the district's one school had an enrollment of 519 students and 37.6 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 13.80:1.District information for the Somerdale Borough School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed May 17, 2013.
The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "CD", the sixth highest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed October 27, 2009.
For grades 9–12, public school students attend Sterling High School, a regional high school serving students from Magnolia, Somerdale, Stratford, along with the sending districts of Hi-Nella and Laurel Springs.Sterling High School 2011 Report Card Narrative, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed May 17, 2013. "Sterling High School District is a regional district serving Hi Nella, Laurel Springs, Magnolia, Somerdale and Stratford." The high school is located in Somerdale.

==School==

Somerdale Park School served an enrollment of 503 students (based on 2010-11 enrollment data from the National Center for Education Statistics).Data for the Somerdale School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed May 17, 2013.New Jersey School Directory for the Somerdale School District, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed May 17, 2013.

==Administration==

Core members of the district's administration are:New Jersey School Directory, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed May 17, 2013.

==References==

==External links==


