[[James V of Scotland]]

CATEGORIES: Scottish monarchs, Scottish princes, House of Stuart, Scottish people of Welsh descent, Dukes of Rothesay, Knights of the Garter, Knights of the Golden Fleece, Modern child rulers, Burials at Holyrood Abbey, 1512 births, 1542 deaths, 16th-century Scottish people, Knights of the Order of Saint Michael, People from Linlithgow, James V of Scotland, 16th-century monarchs in Europe, Scottish poets

James V (10 April 1512 – 14 December 1542) was King of Scots from 9 September 1513 until his death, which followed the Scottish defeat at the Battle of Solway Moss. His only surviving legitimate child, Mary, succeeded him to the throne when she was just six days old.

==Early life==

James was son of King James IV of Scotland and his queen Margaret Tudor, a daughter of Henry VII of England, and was the only legitimate child of James IV to survive infancy.  He was born on 10 April 1512, at Linlithgow Palace, Linlithgowshire and christened the next day, receiving the titles Duke of Rothesay and Prince and Great Steward of Scotland.[tpl]cite DNB|last=Mackay|first=Æneas|authorlink=Aeneas James George Mackay|wstitle=James V of Scotland|pages=153-161|volume=29[/tpl]  He became king at just seventeen months old when his father was killed at the Battle of Flodden Field on 9 September 1513.
James was crowned in the Chapel Royal at Stirling Castle on 21 September 1513. During his childhood, the country was ruled by regents, first by his mother, until she remarried the following year, and then by John Stewart, 2nd Duke of Albany, who was next in line to the throne after James and his younger brother, the posthumously-born Alexander Stewart, Duke of Ross. Other regents included Robert Maxwell, 5th Lord Maxwell, a member of the Council of Regency who was also bestowed as Regent of Arran, the largest island in the Firth of Clyde. In February 1517, James came from Stirling to Holyroodhouse, Edinburgh, but during an outbreak of plague in the city he was moved to the care of Antoine d'Arces at nearby rural Craigmillar Castle.Accounts of the Lord High Treasurer of Scotland, vol. 5, 130, extra locks bought. At Stirling, the 10-year-old James had a guard of 20 footmen dressed in his colours, red and yellow. When he went to the park below the Castle, "by secret and in right fair and soft wedder (weather)," six horsemen would scour the countryside two miles roundabout for intruders.Historic Manuscripts Commission, Earl of Mar & Kellie at Alloa House, (1904), 11–2, Ordinance for keeping James V, 3 August 1522. Poets wrote his own nursery rhymes, advising him on royal behaviour. William Stewart in his Princelie Majestie counselled against ice-skating:

