[[Tenhipalam]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Malappuram district

Tenhipalam (also spelt Thenhipalam) is a panchayat in Tirurangadi Taluk in Malappuram district of Kerala in India. The population was 27,273 at the 2001 census, with 13,293 males and 13,980 females. Indian census.Thenhippalam. OurVillageIndia.org. Retrieved on 2008-08-02. Tenhipalam is known for the University of Calicut, which is the first university in Malabar region. The university is located north-west part of Tenhipalam. 'Chelari' is the main commercial place in Tenhipalam panchayat while 'Panambra' is considered as the headquarters of the panchayat.

==Geography==

Tenhipalam panchayat is situated north west region of Malappuram district, about 35 km away from district headquarters Malappuram and 11 km north of Taluk headquarters Tirurangadi. It shares its borders with Chelembra panchayat in north, Pallikkal and Peruvalloor panchayats in east, Kadalundi River separates Vallikkunnu panchayat in west. In Southern side it shares border with Mooniyoor panchayat. It is located 24 km south of Kozhikode on the Mangalore–Edapally national highway 17.

==Transport==

Tenhipalam is well connected with all parts of Kerala by road. National Highway 17 passes through Tenhipalam. All rural localities in the panchayat are well connected to the arterial national highway by good quality roads. Mini buses operate from rural areas to nearest small towns such as Chemmad, Feroke, Kondotty and Kottakadavu. Private Buses operating between Thrissur and Kozhikode call at the University of Calicut. KSRTC buses, which operate between Kozhikode and various southern towns and cities in Kerala also have stop at the university on route to Tenhipalam.
Nearest railway stations are Parappanangadi and Feroke; which are located 12 km South-West and 14 km North-West respectively from the centre of Tenhipalam. The major railway station of Kozhikode is located 24 km away.
Calicut International Airport at Karipur is located 12 km east of Tenhipalam.

==Education==

The main campus of the University of Calicut is located in Thenjipalam.About the University. University of Calicut. Retrieved on 2008-08-02.

==References==


