[[Anne Osborn Krueger]]

CATEGORIES: 1934 births, Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences, Managing directors of the International Monetary Fund, Fellows of the Econometric Society, Duke University faculty, Living people, Oberlin College alumni, University of Wisconsin–Madison alumni, Johns Hopkins University faculty, Hoover Institution people, Stanford University Department of Economics faculty, World Bank Chief Economists, American people of Australian descent

Anne Osborn Krueger (born February 12, 1934 in Endicott, New York) is an American economist.  She was the World Bank Chief Economist from 1982 to 1986, and the first deputy managing director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) from 2001 to 2006. She is currently professor of international economics at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies in Washington, D.C.

==Early life==

Krueger was born on February 12, 1934. Her father was a physician. Her uncles include the Australian politician Sir Reginald Wright and physiologist Sir Roy Wright. She received her undergraduate degree from Oberlin College and her Ph.D. in economics from the University of Wisconsin–Madison.

==Professional career==

As an economist, Krueger is known in macroeconomics and trade, famously coining the term rent-seeking in a 1974 article."The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society," American Economic Review 64.3 (1974): 291 Walter E. Williams 303Eamonn Butler, Public Choice: A Primer, London: Institute of Economic Affairs, 2012, p. 75 Furthermore, she has frequently criticised the U.S. sugar subsidies."The Political Economy of Controls: American Sugar," NBER Working Paper 2504 (1988) She has published extensively on policy reform in developing countries, the role of multilateral institutions in the international economy, and the political economy of trade policy. In her 1996 Presidential address to the American Economic Association, she explored the lack of congruence between successful trade and development policies enacted worldwide and prevailing academic views.
She taught at the University of Minnesota from 1959 to 1982 before serving as World Bank Chief Economist from 1982 to 1986.
After leaving the Bank, she taught at Duke University from 1987–1993, when she joined the faculty of Stanford University as Herald L. and Caroline L. Ritch Professor in Humanities and Sciences in the Department of Economics. She was also the founding Director of Stanford's Center for Research on Economic Development and Policy Reform; and a Senior Fellow of the Hoover Institution.
She served as First Deputy Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) from September 1, 2001 to August 31, 2006, serving as Acting Managing Director of the Fund on a temporary basis between March 4, 2004 (resignation of Horst Köhler), and June 7, 2004 (starting date for Rodrigo de Rato's mandate). Until the appointment of Christine Lagarde in 2011, she was the only female to fill the role of IMF Managing Director.
In 2005, she was awarded the prestigious title of Honorary Patron of the University Philosophical Society, Trinity College Dublin. Beginning in the spring of 2007, she assumed the position of professor of international economics at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies in Washington, D.C.
She is a Distinguished Fellow and past President of the American Economic Association, a member of the National Academy of Sciences, and a Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research. She is the recipient of a number of economic prizes and awards.

==Editorship==

==References==

==External Links and Sources==


