[[Kenneth L. Davis]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American medical academics, American medical researchers, Yale University alumni, Mount Sinai School of Medicine alumni, Stanford Medical School alumni, Mount Sinai School of Medicine faculty, Members of the Institute of Medicine

Kenneth L. Davis is an American author and medical researcher who developed the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale, the most widely used tool to test the efficacy of treatments for Alzheimer's Disease designed specifically to evaluate the severity of cognitive and noncognitive behavioral dysfunctions characteristic to persons with Alzheimer's disease.A new rating scale for Alzheimer's disease, American Journal of Psychiatry
His paper, "Dopamine in schizophrenia—a review and reconceptualization" (American Journal of Psychiatry, 148 11: 1474-86, November 1991) is the third most-cited paper on schizophrenia research in its decade.Science Watch
He is currently the President and Chief Executive Officer of the Mount Sinai Health System in New York City.

==Alzheimer's research==

Davis participated in breakthrough proof-of-concept studies and clinical trials of cholinesterase inhibitors. These trials (the first multicenter ones for cholinesterase inhibitors) established efficacy and ultimately led the first four of the five FDA-approved compounds for treating the symptoms of Alzheimer's: tacrine, rivastigmine, galantamine, donepezil and memantineU.S. Food and Drug Administration
In 1978, Davis, together with Richard Mohs, conducted the first well-controlled study of a drug that was shown able to improve the storage and retrieval functions of long-term memory in humans.Science Magazine
In 1987, Davis participated in the first study providing strong evidence that Alzheimer’s risk is inherited.Strong New Evidence Found of Inherited Alzheimer Risk, New York Times
While at Mount Sinai Hospital, Davis and his associates have been at the forefront in the delineation of the role of amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease, and were among the first to report the cloning and chromosomal location of the amyloid precursor protein, regarded as one of the most important discoveries in Alzheimer’s research in the previous 15 years.The Journal of the American Medical Association

==Schizophrenia research==

Davis's work on schizophrenia has shown that oligodendroglia cells and myelin play roles in the disease's pathophysiologyMyelin and oligodendrocyte abnormalities in schizophrenia, Cambridge Journals and that dopamine – long thought to be merely hyperactive in a schizophrenic brain – is actually hypoactive in different regions.Schizophrenia, Bipolar May Share Cause, WebMD.com 
While studies have shown that individuals born in winter months are disproportionately likely to develop schizophrenia, Davis participated in a 2006 study that demonstrated that this disproportionality also exists in tropical regions, ruling out cold weather as the cause.Seasonality effects on schizophrenic births in multiplex families in a tropical island

==Biography==

Davis graduated magna cum laude from Yale College and later valedictorian of Mount Sinai School of Medicine's second graduating class where he received the Harold Elster Memorial Award for highest academic achievement.New York Times Graduate medical education was completed at Stanford University.
In 1979, Davis was made Chief of Psychiatry at Bronx Veteran's Affairs Medical Center, where he became the first director of its Schizophrenia Biological Research Center. From 1987  until 2003, he was Chairman of Psychiatry at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
In 2003, Davis was appointed Dean of the Mount Sinai School of Medicine and held that position  until 2007, when he was succeeded by Dennis S. Charney, M.D. Davis was also appointed as the  President and C.E.O. of the Mount Sinai Medical Center in 2003 – positions he holds today. He is the director of the Mount Sinai Silvio Conte Neuroscience Center, Trustee of the New York Academy of Medicine, and Chair of the New York Academy of Medicine Deans Council. In addition, he has served as Chairman of the Board of Governors for the Greater New York Hospital Association.
In September 2013, when the Mount Sinai Medical Center merged with Continuum Health Partners, Davis became the President and CEO of the Mount Sinai Health System.

==Awards and recognition==

==Books==

==References==

==External links==


