[[Angelique Monet]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American beauty pageant winners

Angelique Monét is an American multi-media talent and former Ms. Black South Carolina USA.Google Archive of the Spartanburg, SC, Herald-Journal - Jan 1, 1997 Monét attended St. Augustines College, graduating with a degree in mass communications. Monét is the owner and CEO of Greta Joanne Entertainment.Angelique Monét's Greta Joanne Entertainment http://www.gretajoanneentertainment.com/about-us/  Angelique Monét is also the world's only stage actress and ventriloquist.Google Archive of the Spartanburg, SC, Herald-Journal - Jan 1, 1997  In 2001, Angelique Monét performed on Theater Row her one-woman Off-Broadway show  of Multiple Me written by Edgar Chisholm where she portrayed several personalities and her ventriloquist figure had multiple personalities in addition to those Monét portrayed. She is listed under A History of Modern Day Ventriloquism as a modern day ventriloquist, cited for her one woman play. Angelique Monét  is also a singer and composer who has an album on iTunes called "Not Wasting Time."
Monét's directorial film debut came with the short film BitterSweet which screened at the Cannes Film Festival Short Film Corner (SFC) in 2005.[tpl]citation needed|date=May 2012[/tpl] Her feature film Deceptive premiered at the Marche du Film during Festival de Cannes (2010).Floss Magazine Interview pre-release http://flossmagazine.com/?p=217 Archived at: http://www.webcitation.org/680p2ETm6 She had a theatrical release through her own
releasing company at Big Cinema in New York, New York as cited by Why Blue Matters Blog.  She also started the Hamptons Black International Film Festival which hosted six films in December 2008 which received a mention from Sag Harbor.Sag Harbor mentioning HBIFF http://sagharboronline.com/sagharborexpress/arts/black-film-festival-comes-to-town-1760 Webcite Archive: http://www.webcitation.org/680qGeCD3 The festival (HBIFF) returned in 2010, screening 17 films in Montauk, NY covered by The Montauk Sun, Hampton Daze Magazine,  Dan's Paper (page 59),  Why Blue Matters Blog, The Thrillest, and the East Hampton Star. In 2011 the Hamptons Black International Film Festival held its last event before its rebranding in 2012. The 2011 festival showcased 10 films and the festival was covered by a host of media outlets: Dans Paper Article, Long Island Pulse Magazine Article, Hamptons Mouthpeice Article, East Hampton Patch Article, The Sag Harbor Express - Letter to the Editor, Southampton Patch Article, The New York Amsterdam News article, and Hamptons.com. In 2012, Artisan Festival International: World Peace Initiative opened its doors the Hamptons community as well as hosting a curated program in Cannes, France during Festival de Cannes, covered by Scotland TV, Killkenny People, The Irish Examiner, Deadline News UK, and this Indiewire Article.  Artisan Festival International: World Peace Initiative is an umbrella festival comprising smaller divisions of the whole (fine art, music, fashion, film and theatre), all meant to stimulate cross cultural dialog through the arts and bring about peace relations through understanding of culture other than that which individuals are raised with. The curated Cannes Program screened 10 films with the Hamptons event boosting its record to a total of 51 films, making it the most successful event to date, held in the town of Southampton, NY.
Angelique Monét is the granddaughter of the Honorable Theo Walker Mitchell, a former Senator and first African American gubernatorial candidate to receive nomination from a major party (Democratic) 1992. Angelique Monét  lineage originates in England, France, Spain, and Native American.  As a result of her background in the arts and humanity, she was appointed and stylized as HRH Princess Angelique Monét of Aquitaine. This is a non-reigning title, and does not carry in political affiliations with the French government or Aquitaine, within her own right she is also Duchess. In 2012 Angelique Monét was appointed Honorary Ambassador and Cultural Attache of Royal Academy of United Nations.

==References==


