[[Hanze Institute of Technology]]

CATEGORIES: Engineering universities and colleges in the Netherlands, Hanze University Groningen, Assen, Buildings and structures in Drenthe

The Hanze Institute of Technology (HIT) is part of the Hanze University Groningen in the Netherlands. The HIT is based in Assen where it offers a Bachelor Programme in Advanced Sensor Applications (ASA). It started in September 2008 as a European pioneer in the field of sensor technology education, and is working closely together with partners such as Astron, Nederlandse Aardolie Maatschappij (NAM) / Shell and Sun Microsystems.HIT: HIT partners

==Aims==

The Hanze Institute of Technology (HIT) aims to be Europe's most advanced, international engineering school, specialising in the field of sensor technology. HIT seeks to identify and reward talent, excellence and innovation. 
The education offered is based around the theme sensor technology, which includes aspects of engineering from all disciplines.
HIT focuses on talented, high achieving students who possess SEnSE; Science interest, Entrepreneurial style, Solid determination and Excellence. Students will benefit from the involvement of industry experts as well as the social relevance and depth of the programme.Elektronik Praxis (in German): Neuer Studiengang,Advanced Sensor Applications‘ im niederländischen Assen

==Bachelor Programme==

The Bachelor Advanced Sensor Applications (ASA) is a four year programme, specialising in intelligent sensor innovation. The Bachelor consists of a one year introduction year and a three year main phase. The Hanze Institute of Technology (HIT) is the first international engineering school in The Netherlands and works in partnership with national and international leaders in the field of sensor technology. This is reflected in the institute’s state-of-the-art building and high-tech educational facilities. Although the Bachelor Programme specialises in sensor technology, it covers many disciplines, including electrical and mechanical engineering, mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, computer science and human technology.HIT: Advanced Sensor Applications
The ASA Bachelor is the first of its kind to specialise in sensor technology. Sensor systems are extremely important in today’s world, influencing and affecting the lives of billions. The Bachelor Programme gives you the knowledge and skills to become an innovation leader with a broad focus and the ability to successfully apply technology within today’s world.

==Exemption clause==

Highly talented students may be eligible for admission directly into the three year main phase, thereby reducing study time by one year. Students need to demonstrate an outstanding knowledge in the fields of mathematics, science and English. Therefore, a higher IELTS test score of 6.5 or TOEFL iBT test score of 100 is required.
Furthermore, three personal essays describing the applicant's character and the factors that have had an impact on applicant's personal development,greatest achievements; and career goals.HIT: Admission

==ISTeam==

Deciding where and especially at what University to study is a once in a lifetime decision of each student and most likely will be a cornerstone for the future career. Obtaining detailed information about the University, the curriculum and the student life are crucial to make the right decision. The International Student (IS) Team consists of students from all over the world that had been through that decision themselves and therewith can pass on their valuable experiences as well as answer specific questions on a student-to-student perspective to ensure that prospective students make the right decision. The ISTeam can be contacted in every language.International Student Team: Contact details

==Photos==

Image:HIT-building exterior.JPG|The HIT-building seen from bypassing road.
Image:HIT-building exterior2.JPG|Close-up view of the HIT-building.
Image:HIT-building exterior night.jpg|Close-up view of the HIT-building at night.
Image:HIT-building interior.jpg|View of the cantine.
Image:HIT-building interior2.JPG|View of the staircase.
Image:HIT-building interior3.JPG|View of a part of the third floor.
Image:HIT-building interior4.JPG|View of 'Silicon Valley', a multi-purpose working area.
Image:HIT_Panorama.JPG|180 degree view of Hanze Institute of Technology building and its surrounding.

==References==

==External links==


