[[James Dowdall]]

CATEGORIES: People of Elizabethan Ireland, 1599 deaths, People from Drogheda, Irish Roman Catholics, People executed under Elizabeth I of England by hanging, drawing and quartering, Year of birth unknown, 16th-century Irish people, Irish people executed by hanging, drawing and quartering

James Dowdall (date of birth unknown; executed at Exeter, England, 20 September 1600) was a Roman Catholic merchant of Drogheda, Ireland.Several authorities, including Challoner, describe him as a native of Wexford. Further confusion is added by reason of the fact that another contemporary, James Dowdall, died a confessor. According to Rothe, however, the Catholic martyr belonged to Drogheda, and traded with England and the Continent. The Dowdalls of Louth originated at Dovedale in Derbyshire and became prominent in Ireland in the late Middle Ages.Otway-Ruthven, A. J.  A History of Mediaeval Ireland  Barnes and Noble 1993 p.116James Dowdall, the Lord Chief Justice of Ireland, who died in 1584 was probably a cousin of the martyr.Ball, F. Elrington The Judges in Ireland 1221-1921 John Murray London 1926 Vol.1 p.210
In the summer of 1598, when returning from France, his ship was driven by stress of weather onto the coast of Devonshire, and he was arrested by William Bourchier, 3rd Earl of Bath, who had him under examination. Dowdall publicly avowed that he rejected the supremacy of Elizabeth I of England, and only recognized that of the Pope. 
The earl forwarded the examination to Sir Robert Cecil, and had Dowdall committed to Exeter jail. Whilst in prison he was tortured and put to the rack, but continued unchanged in his Catholicism. On 18 June 1599, the Earl of Bath wrote to Sir Robert Cecil for instructions in regard to James Dowdall, who had been detained in prison almost a year. Accordingly he was tried at the Exeter assizes, and was ordered to be hanged, drawn, and quartered. 
His name was included in the Apostolic Process of the Irish Martyrs before the Congregation of Sacred Rites. It stalled, apparently because of the uncertainty of identification of the James Dowdalls.

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==


