[[Nemani Nadolo]]

CATEGORIES: 1988 births, Fijian rugby union players, Australian rugby union players, Australian people of Fijian descent, Fiji international rugby union players, NEC Green Rockets players, Fijian expatriate rugby union players, Expatriate rugby union players in France, Expatriate rugby union players in Japan, Expatriate rugby union players in England, Fijian expatriates in France, Fijian expatriates in the United Kingdom, Fijian expatriates in Japan, Exeter Chiefs players, Crusaders (rugby union) players, Super Rugby players, CS Bourgoin-Jallieu players, Living people

Nemani Nadolo (born 31 January 1988), formerly Ratu Nasiganiyavi, is a Fijian rugby union player. His usual position is wing or centre. He has signed on to play for the Crusaders in 2014.

==Family and early life==

Ratu Nemani Driu Nasiganiyavi was born in Sigatoka, Fiji. At three months of age he moved to Brisbane, Australia where his father, Iliesa Siganiyavi, played rugby for Queensland.
He changed his name to Nemani Nadolo later as an adult, adopting his mother's maiden name in 2009 instead of the surname of his father, who had left the family home when he was young.
He attended Nudgee College, and was selected for the Queensland Schoolboys rugby team in 2005. He is the older brother of Chris Kuridrani (formerly Chris Nasiganiyavi), and Lote Tuqiri is his cousin.

==Rugby career==

After featuring for Perth Spirit in the 2007 Australian Rugby Championship (as Ratu Siganiyavi), he headed east to play for Randwick in 2008.  He hit the ground running for Randwick scoring 13 tries in his first seven matches. His club rugby season was punctuated by selection for the Australian Under 20 team for the 2008 IRB Junior World Championship, where he crossed seven times in five matches to be the tournament’s leading tryscorer.
Nasiganiyavi was one of the finds of the 2008 season, with his hard-running and try-scoring prowess earning the powerhouse wing a Super 14 contract with the Waratahs.
Nasiganiyavi's size, style of play and Pacific Islander background drew him comparisons to Jonah Lomu when he signed for the Waratahs in 2008. According to prop Matt Dunning, "he runs like a chicken but he is faster than a lion".
He played his first match for the Junior Waratahs on the 2008 Development Tour of Fiji less than 200 metres from his mother’s village in Nadi. After changing his name to Nemani Nadolo in November 2009, he signed to play for Manly in the Shute Shield for 2010.
He signed with French TOP14 team Bourgoin-Jallieu for the 2010–11 season, but transferred to England's Exeter Chiefs in January 2011. Nadolo's brief time at Exeter was fairly troublesome, He was registered at Exeter under his Australian Passport, and was mistakenly picked alongside two other non kolpak players. This is a breach of IRB regulations and resulted in Exeter being docked two premiership points and fined £5,000. Also while at Exeter he was arrested by police for Drink Driving, he was subsequently banned from driving for 18 months and fined £950. The following day it was announced that Nadolo had been released from his contract with the club. Nadolo played for the NEC Green Rockets in the Japan Top League between 2011 and 2013.
In October 2013, Nadolo signed to play for Crusaders in the 2014 Super Rugby season.

==International career==

Nadolo made his Test debut in 2010 when selected in the 24-member Fiji team for a one-off match against Australia, followed by the 2010 IRB Pacific Nations Cup.

==References==

==External links==


