[[David F. Evans]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 births, American Mormon missionaries in Japan, People from Salt Lake City, Utah, People from Los Angeles, California, Bishops of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, University of Utah alumni, Brigham Young University alumni, American lawyers, Stake presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Members of the First Quorum of the Seventy of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Living people, 20th-century Mormon missionaries, 21st-century Mormon missionaries, American general authorities of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

David Frewin Evans (born August 11, 1951) has been a general authority of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) since 2005.

==Early life, education, career, and family==

Evans was born in Salt Lake City, Utah.  He grew up in Los Angeles, California, where his father David C. Evans worked for Bendix Corporation. His mother, Joy F. Evans, was as a counselor to Barbara W. Winder in the general presidency of the church's Relief Society from 1984 to 1990.
Evans served as a Mormon missionary in the church's Japan Mission from 1970 to 1972.  After his mission, he received a bachelor's degree in community health education from the University of Utah and a juris doctorate from Brigham Young University.  He then worked as a member of the Salt Lake City law firm of Durham, Jones and Pinegar.  He later worked as an executive with SEI USA in Newport Beach, California and was a partner in the law firm of Snell and Willmer.
He married the former Mary Dee Shepherd in 1973 and they are the parents of eight children.

==LDS Church service==

In the LDS Church, Evans has served as a bishop, stake Young Men president, scoutmaster, and counselor in a stake presidency.  From 1998 to 2001, Evans was president of the church's Japan Nagoya Mission.
In 2002, Evans became the president of the Salt Lake University 4th Stake, a stake for married students of the University of Utah living off-campus.  In August 2004, it was decided these individuals should attend the regular geographical wards in which they resided and the stake was disbanded.  Evans then became president of the Salt Lake Emigration Stake, a position he remained in until his call as a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy at the church's April 2005 General Conference.
As a general authority, he has served as a counselor and as president of the Asia North Area, Assistant Executive Director in the church's Priesthood and Missionary departments, and since 2011 as Executive Director of the Missionary Department.

==References==

==External links==


