[[Benjamin Davies (actor)]]

CATEGORIES: 1980 births, Laurence Olivier Awards, Laurence Olivier Award winners, Living people, People from Edinburgh, Scottish male film actors, Scottish male stage actors, 20th-century Scottish male actors, Alumni of the Drama Centre London, 21st-century Scottish male actors, The Fast and the Furious

Benjamin John Gareth Davies (born 19 September 1980) is a Laurence Olivier award-winning actor.

==Early life==

Davies was born in Edinburgh, Scotland. He was educated at Tavistock College Devon, Lewes Priory Sussex and the Drama Centre London, Chalk Farm. His earliest performances were at Theatre Royal, Plymouth, National Youth Theatre, Glyndebourne Opera House where he was a member of their young companies.
In 1997 Davies won entry to the prestigious Drama Centre London aged 17, where in 1998 he began his training under Yat Malmgren, Christopher Fettes and Reuven Adiv.

==Career==

After graduating Davies went on to work at the Royal Court Theatre where he won a Laurence Olivier Award for his portrayal of Danny in Grae Cleugh's "Fucking Games". He then appeared at the Traverse Theatre to work with Wilson Milam, then to the National Theatre Studio. He played "Dill" in Harper Lee's To Kill a Mocking Bird. Later that year he worked with the avant-garde film director Peter Greenaway on The Tulse Luper Suitcases, Part 1: The Moab Story and The Tulse Luper Suitcases,Part 2: Vaux to the Sea. Then playing Dominic Morrison in "Sea of Souls" for BBC_television_drama, then Davies played "Lawrence" in the first ever staged production of "Lovely Evening" by Peter Gill, for Daniel Evans directorial début for the Young Vic Theatre. Later that year he joined the Oxford Stage Company now Headlong Theatre, appearing in "Rookery Nook" by Ben Travers for Dominic Dromgoole final show with the OSC. He played "Mickybo" in "Mojo Mickybo" by Owen McCafferty at the Trafalgar Studios in the West End. Davies's movie break came when he appeared alongside Vin Diesel, Paul Walker and Dwayne Johnson in Fast & Furious 6, directed by Justin Lin. He returned to the stage for The National Theatre of Scotland in the John Tiffany production of Black Watch at the Paramount Theatre and the American Conservatory Theater San Francisco. He returned to television screens for FremantleMedia crime drama Suspects (TV series).

==External links==


