[[Pustra/Vile-een's Vaudeville]]

CATEGORIES: British comedy duos, Vaudeville, Performance Art

Pustra/Vile-een's Vaudeville arrived on the Alternative Cabaret and Neo-Burlesque scene in London, England in 2006. With their trademark comedy and unusual stage acts, they have quickly established themselves as a refreshing, strange and highly talented duo with a twist of Sideshow. Featured in Time Out Magazine's Variety Feature: 
The pair has been linked to The Tiger Lillies. They also worked with David Mitchell, Channel 4's Peep Show TV series and performed for Musician, Peaches at the Royal Festival Hall in London.
The duo split up in August 2009 and Mr Pustra or Le Pustra, reinvented himself as 'Vaudeville's Darkest Muse' and have established himself as a respected performance artist, singer and fashion icon with a growing fan base across the globe -  using social media such as  Facebook to promote his work. The artist is often compared to German countertenor Klaus Nomi, Nina Hagen and Serge Gainsbourg. In 2010, Mr Pustra or known as Daemiane (born July 1, 1977) produced and directed a fashion video for Serbian designer Marko Mitanovski which was screened at London Fashion Week and Malasian International Fashion Week. In 2011, Mr Pustra appeared at Coney Island in New York, performed at London's clubnight 'The Face' alongside 'king of the Neo-Romantics and former 'The Blitz' club owner, Steve Strange and produced his first theatrical show 'Villains' which was staged at Rome's Teatro Palladium. Recently Mr Pustra collaborated with The Irrepressibles on the musical score for a new film by Shelly Love, due out in 2014 and walked in London Fashion Week for designer, Ziad Ghanem. Pustra was featured in the book 'New Club Kids: London Party Fashion in the Noughties by photographer, Oggy Yordanov and included in the exhibition, 'The Human Zoo' by Matilda Temperley, sister to fashion designer, Alice Temperley. Other credits include Amanda Palmer during her recent tour of Europe. Mr Pustra is currently working on his first book, simply entitled 'Le Pustra' which will be available in 2014.

