[[Juan Carlos Moreno Rodríguez]]

CATEGORIES: 1975 births, Living people, People from Barcelona, Spanish footballers, Catalan footballers, Association football midfielders, La Liga footballers, Segunda División footballers, FC Barcelona B footballers, FC Barcelona footballers, Albacete Balompié footballers, UE Lleida footballers, Recreativo de Huelva footballers, CF Extremadura footballers, Terrassa FC footballers, CD Numancia players, FC Cartagena footballers, Spain youth international footballers, Spanish football managers

Juan Carlos Moreno Rodríguez (born 19 April 1975) is a Spanish retired footballer who played as an attacking midfielder.
He appeared in 374 games in Segunda División over the course of 14 seasons, scoring 52 goals in representation of eight teams, mainly Numancia. In La Liga, he appeared for Barcelona and Numancia.

==Football career==

Born in Barcelona, Catalonia, Moreno was a product of FC Barcelona's youth academy. He appeared in seven first-team matches during the 1995–96 season, courtesy of manager Johan Cruyff, following which he would return to the B-side for three years.
Moreno went on to have several second division stints, mainly in his native region: Albacete Balompié, UE Lleida (twice), Recreativo de Huelva, CF Extremadura and Terrassa FC. For the 2003–04 campaign he joined CD Numancia, being an undisputed first-choice from the start and producing his best individual season in his first year, scoring nine goals in 41 games (3,476 minutes) as the club returned to La Liga after an absence of three years.
On 14 September 2008, as Numancia had achieved another top flight promotion, Moreno netted the opener in a 3–4 defeat at Real Madrid;Real Madrid 4–3 Numancia; ESPN Soccernet, 14 September 2008 during that season he was used somewhat regularly and scored three times, but the Soria side was relegated.
In the last day of the January transfer window in 2010, Moreno was loaned to FC Cartagena in division two, until the end of 2009–10. In June, aged 35, he retired, having appeared in 419 games during his 16-year professional career – scoring 56 goals – although only 45 in the first division, 38 of those with Numancia.

==References==

==External links==


