[[Scott C Shephard]]

CATEGORIES: British music industry executives, 1959 births, Living people

Scott C Shephard (born 19/09/1979) is a British music industry executive and consultant. He has worked with artists such as dance act De Nada and Motown Records recording artist Val Young.
Scott got his start in music working for the U.S. and U.K. divisions of Death Row Records, the rap label once home to Dr. Dre, Tupac Shakur and Snoop Dogg.Welcome to Death Row Staff His work marketing releases such as the Dysfunktional Family (soundtrack), led to him becoming personal publicist for artists on the label including Danny Boy, and Jewell.Interview With Death Row Records R&B Singer Jewell
In 2003, Scott was introduced to music producer DJ Slip of Comptons Most Wanted, which segued into an involvement with Los Angeles, California based record label IV Life Records and Mafia IV Life car club, founded by Ladell Rowles (a.k.a. Del Dog).SoundClick: IV Life Records - LA's #1 Independent Music Label.
Scott was New Media Manager for Dynasty/C.O.B. Records in 2004, a new imprint launched by rapper Crooked I. Alongside Crooked I, Scott designed, marketed and developed platforms such as Dynasty TV, a digital video show that showcased music and events,Crooked I Launches Dynasty TV and WestcoastDynasty.com, a web community which distributed music including the monumental Hip-Hop Weekly series.Hip-Hop Weekly era Crooked I soon became one of the leading faces emerging from musics ‘Digital Era’ and they're innovative marketing strategies were rewarded when music publication VIBE magazine labelled Crooked I and Jay Electronica as ”Internet Guerrillas" on the cover of their August 2008 issue,August 2008 VIBE Magazine Cover with an article discussing the Hip-Hop Weekly series and his approach to marketing on the internet. Crooked I mentioned Scott at the end of his song "The Finale (Week 52)".Crooked I's "Hip Hop Weekly #52 (The Finale)" Crooked I is now signed to Eminem's Shady Records as a member of the American hip hop supergroup Slaughterhouse.Eminem Signs Slaughterhouse
In October 2008, Scott was appointed President of Global Music Group Europe, the Europe Division of New York-based record label, Global Music Group.Former Interscope And Warner Bros. Executive Kevin Black Joins Global Music Group The company purchased historic hip-hop label Death Row Records for $25 million on June 25, 2008.Global Music Group Acquires Death Row Assets

==Sources and references==

==External links==


