[[Aftab Shaban Mirani]]

CATEGORIES: Chief Ministers of Sindh, Defence Ministers of Pakistan, Sindhi people, Sindh politicians, Pakistani politicians, Pakistan Peoples Party politicians, Living people

Aftab Shaban Mirani ([tpl]lang-ur| آفتاب شعبان ميرانی [/tpl]) is a politician from Shikarpur, Sindh, Pakistan. The former defence ministerSHIKARPUR: Benazir opposed to rule of gun: Mirani is now a representative for the NA-202 constituency.NA-202 (Shikarpur (Old Shikarpur-I)) - Election Commission of Pakistan

==Family==

Aftab Shahban Mirani's wife Ms Safia Aftab Mirani died on October 5, 2007.
Following the death of his wife, he was phoned by Benazir Bhutto who also spoke to his daughters about his wife saying she was "a brave woman who always stood by her husband, even in the most adverse circumstances." She even visited Mr.Mirani's residence on the second day of her stay in Pakistan, right after her visit to the Quaid-e-Azams mazar. She was received by Mr.Mirani, his daughter, Seema Khurram (wife of Khurram Gulzar (P.S.P) D.I.G of karachi, one of the Senior most Police Officer of Sindh) and also Danial Ahmed, grandson of Mr.Mirani, and son of Mr.Khurram Gulzar. She offered her condolences to everyone there and left for the Bilawal House from there.   "KARACHI : Benazir condoles death of Mirani's wife

==Career==

Mr. Aftab Shahban Mirani was Chief Minister of Sindh and also served as Defence Minister in Benazir Bhutto's government. Following the resignation of president Pervez Musharraf in August 2008 he was for a time considered to be a potential successor.Major U.S. Ally Pakistan President Pervez Musharraf Resigns
In the general election of 2008 Mirani stood for as a candidate for the NA-202 seat of Shikarpur and Khanpur in the National Assembly. He won the seat defeating Dr. Muhammad Ibrahim Jatoi of the National Peoples Party, by 47,379 votes to 39,405.
Parliamentary Commission For Judicial Appointments
Following the 18th amendment in the Constitution of Pakistan, the method of appointment of judges in the superior courts faced a change. Contrary to the past, now the Parliament was given a right to keep a check on the recommendations forwarded by the judiciary in this regard. This induction i.e. 175-A was challenged in the Supreme Court. After being heavily debated, the Supreme Court affirmed the supremacy of the parliament by upholding the new amendment and thus there came a need for the formation of the "Parliamentary Commission for Judicial Appointments" . On 16 November 2010, the ruling PPP announced its members for the Parliamentary Commission. Reaffirming its status of the "Symbol Of Federation", PPP inducted a member from each of the four provinces in the commission, unlike the opposition, which nominated three out four members from Punjab. Aftab Shahban Mirani was PPP's nomination from Sindh. He thus holds the privilege of being the pioneer member of the Parliamentary Commission For Judaical Appointments.

|-

==References==

He is a member of the Public accounts committee (PAC) of National Assembly of Pakistan. In early February 2010 he chairing the delegate of PAC to attend Annual Summer Residency training for public accounts committee at La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia
Mr. Mirani is a distinguished personality of the shikarpur who devoted his life for the development of the district. He is a well-mannered, charming and cold-tempered person. He believes in merit and lawfulness. He is easily accessible and very responsive to our needs.
By Ikramullah, Mujeeb Rahman, Mushtaq Ali Mirani Shikarpur

==External links==


