[[Rosemonde Gérard]]

CATEGORIES: 1871 births, 1953 deaths, Writers from Paris, French women poets, Burials at Passy Cemetery, French women dramatists and playwrights

Louise-Rose-Étiennette Gérard, known as Rosemonde Gérard (April 5, 1871, Paris – July 8, 1953, Paris) was a French poet and playwright. She was the wife of Edmond Rostand (1868–1918, author of Cyrano de Bergerac), and was a granddaughter of Étienne Maurice Gérard, who was a Marshal and a Prime Minister of France.French Wikipedia: Rosemond Gérard; Edmond Rostand.
Gérard is perhaps best known today as the author of the lines:

thumb|A "+ qu'hier − que demain" pendant from about 1930. "A.Augis" is visible on the left edge of the central area.This couplet is taken from a poem, variously known as "L'éternelle chanson" ("The Eternal Song") or "Les Vieux" ("The Old Ones"), that she wrote to Rostand in 1889.See, for example, Iloveyou365. The poem was published in 1890, but did not enjoy immediate success. The phrase became celebrated as an expression of ever-growing love when, in 1907 (17 years after its publication), a Lyons jeweler, Alphonse Augis, had the idea of making a medallion with the core portion of the verse engraved on it.L’Internaute: Aujourd’hui plus qu’hier et bien moins que demain. The medallions became quite popular, and led to the production of other, similarly-decorated jewelry items, such as earrings and matchboxes; many older examples include Augis' name. A very common variation on the design presents the line with the words "plus" and "moins" replaced by the mathematical + and − signs, respectively. The mathematical signs are frequently rendered in tiny gemstones, often in contrasting colors.Adin antique jewelry: Plus qu'hier et moins que demain.
Among Gérard's other works is the play “A Good Little Devil” (1913), co-written with Maurice Rostand.IBDB: Rosemonde Gerard. It was made into a movie of the same name in 1914. Mary Pickford starred in both the play and the movie; she later opined that the movie was one of the worst—if not the worst—she had ever made.IMDB: A Good Little Devil.
Gérard and Rostand were married on April 8, 1890;Edmond Rostand. they had two sons, Maurice (1891–1968) and Jean Rostand (1894–1977). In later years, Gérard and Maurice Rostand frequented an intellectual circle that included Jean-Paul Sartre and Gilbert Martineau.
It has been said that Gérard "doubtless would have been famous had not her husband's star so far eclipsed her own."Theatrehistory.com: Edmond Rostand. After 35 years of widowhood, she died in 1953 and is buried at Cimetiere de Passy, in Paris, as is her son Maurice.Find A Grave: Rosemonde Gerard.

==Works==

==References==


