[[Palestinian Academic Society for the Study of International Affairs]]

CATEGORIES: Palestinian organizations, Palestinian nationalism, Non-governmental organizations involved in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, Think tanks based in the Palestinian territories, Educational institutions established in 1987

The Palestinian Academic Society for the Study of International Affairs (PASSIA) was founded in Jerusalem in March 1987 by Dr. Mahdi Abdul Hadi and a group of Palestinian academics and intellectuals. PASSIA is not affiliated with any government, political party or­ganization, and maintains a completely independent financial and legal inde­pendent status.
PASSIA deals with the various national, Arab and international aspects of the Palestinian Ques­tion through its academic Research Studies Program, dialogue and publication.
A major component of PASSIA’s activities is its Roundtable Meetings Program, and with over 100 publications to its credit, many of which include the minutes of these meetings, PASSIA has proved most successful at promoting understanding of international relations as they affect the Palestinian struggle for justice and peace. As part of its Religious Studies Unit PASSIA also holds regular meetings with religious leaders (mainly local Muslim and Chris­tian dignitaries, but also involving Jews and foreign scholars) in an effort to foster schol­arly under­standing.
Considered to be of equal importance by those familiar with PASSIA’s activities is its Semi­nar Program, which provides a much-needed venue for Palestinian graduates to benefit from the ex­perience and knowledge of local and foreign experts of the highest caliber. PASSIA’s educational and training seminars are divided into two categories: In­ternational Affairs – including seminars on Diplomacy and Conflict Resolution, Strategic Studies and Security, the EU, Education on Democ­racy, The Foreign Policies of Arab States, Japan and the Middle East, and The United States and Canada: Political Systems, Policy-Making and the Middle East – and Civil Society Empowerment, with seminars held to date including those on Policy-Making, Strategic Planning & Media & Com­munication Skills.
Jerusalem has been and will continue to be the core of the Palestine Question. It is also the fo­cus of the majority of PASSIA’s activities due, in part, to its centrality to the Palestin­ian-Israeli struggle and the now inevitable establishment of a Palestinian state. PASSIA hosts regular work­shops that address different but inter-connected issues pertaining to Je­rusalem, such as freedom of access, Israeli settlements, and the various religious, politi­cal, cultural, historical, and civil as­pects of life in the city, in addition to municipal ar­rangements for Jeru­salem as the capital of two independent states. In these meetings, as during all other events held at PASSIA, it is the desire to promote communication, coop­eration and coordi­nation between those with an interest in the fate of this region that overrides any other con­sidera­tion, and which inevitably results in a dia­logue that is as stimulating as it is productive.

==PASSIA Publications==

PASSIA seeks to present the Palestine Question in its national, Arab and international contexts through academic research, dialogue, education, documentation and publication. PASSIA works to achieve its goals through the implementation of the following regular programs: Research, Dialogue, Training and Education in International Affairs, Civil Society Empowerment, Religious Studies, the Question of Jerusalem, and the annual PASSIA Diary.
From the beginning, PASSIA has dedicated a large part of its various program and project activities to the provision of background information, in-depth studies and documentation on issues of concern, as well as the promotion of a better understanding of the Palestinian cause. PASSIA publications aim to be specialized, scientific and objective, yet they often address controversial or neglected issues and allow the expression of a wide range of perspectives. The authors of PASSIA pub lica tions throughout the years have been as diverse as the subjects cov ered and include Palestinian, Arab, Israeli and inter national academics, scholars and experts.
Now in its 25th year, PASSIA is proud to be able to say that its publications have become a sought-after reference source for academics, diplomats, professionals, libraries and anyone with an interest in Palestine, the field of international affairs, and developments in the Middle East.
PASSIA publications are classified as follows: 
Link: Official page of PASSIA publications

==External links==


