[[LollyPop]]

CATEGORIES: Indian films, 2000s Malayalam-language films

LollyPop is a Malayalam film released in 2008. The film is directed by Shafi. It stars Kunchacko Bobanin a (Extended special appearance) with Prithviraj,  Bhavana, Roma, and Jayasurya   . The film started filming on 17 August 2008. The main locations are Kochi and Bangkok. It opened to mixed reviews on 21 December.

==Plot==

Franco (Prithviraj) is a young man who runs an automobile workshop by the beach. His sister Jenny (Roma) is a college student. Franco's friend Eby (Kunchacko Boban) likes Jenny. Franco, who employs two people at his workshop, has some dreams about life.
One day Jenny comes to Franco with a problem. Jenny has an enemy in college called Rose (Bhavana). Rose and Jenny argue with each other every time they meet. While playing basketball, they started an argument and the issue escalated into a huge row. Franco comes to Jenny's college, but he is unable to sort out the issue between Jenny and Rose, as he knows both of them very well.
At this point, a young man called Pranchi (Jayasurya) enters the story. Pranchi is a pickpocket. Pranchi tries to pickpocket Franco and is caught red-handed. They both reach the police station and due to some confusion, both end up behind bars. It is the local priest (Salim Kumar), doubling as a solicitor, who bails them out. The priest asks Franco to be Pranchi's friend and to guide him in the right direction. So Pranchi becomes an employee at Franco's workshop.
Paachi falls in love with Jenny, but Jenny isn't aware of this nor does she have the same feelings towards him. Having made a pact with her brother, she will only marry the guy whom Franco likes and vice versa. She starts liking Eby. When she tells Franco he goes to see Eby without Eby knowing, only to return and tell his sister that he did not like him. Jenny tells Eby this and they sort of break up.
Franco and Rose are in love, and they are hoping Jenny will come to like Rose, but things don't work out the way they planned.
The coming of Pranchi into Franco's life and how Franco tries to make Jenny like Rose forms the crux of the story.
The movie became a below avg. success at box office. The climax of the movie was changed after the first day due to the negative response from theateres.

==Cast==

==Box Office==

The movie opened with a good initial due to the hype it created. But the movie fell down soon after a good initial.

==External links==


