[[The Impatient Patient]]

CATEGORIES: Looney Tunes shorts, 1942 films

The Impatient Patient is a Warner Bros. Looney Tunes cartoon released in theatres in 1942, directed by Norman McCabe and features Daffy Duck as a telegram deliverer. The film is set in a mad scientist's laboratory.
This cartoon was colorized in 1968 (just after Seven Arts Productions, successor to Guild Films, to whom the black-and-white cartoon library had been sold some time before, acquired Warner Bros.) by having every other frame traced over onto a cel. Each redrawn cel was painted in color and then photographed over a colored reproduction of each original background. The animation quality dropped considerably from the original version with this method. The cartoon was colorized again in 1992, this time with a computer adding color to a new print of the original black and white cartoon. This preserved the quality of the original animation (the end result also resembled the actual color cartoons released around the same time).

==Plot summary==

While traipsing through the Ookaboochie Swamps, Daffy Duck seeks to deliver a telegram to "Chloe." He finds the home of "Dr. Jerkyl" and hopes that the physician can cure his hiccups. Daffy's hiccups are so severe that they cause him to damage or destroy everything around him.
Dr. Jerkyl captures Daffy and restrains him to a doctor's chair. Hoping to scare Daffy in order to cure his hiccups, Dr. Jerkyl drinks a potion that turns him into an ogre. Terrified, Daffy asks him who he is, and he responds: "I'm Chloe." Daffy then reads him the telegram, which is a cheerful Happy Birthday message from apparently Frankenstein.
Chloe chases Daffy around the laboratory until the radio is accidentally switched on, prompting him to dance. Once the music ends, the chase resumes. Daffy scrambles to the lab table and mixes a potion, which turns Chloe into an infant. Off camera, Daffy hits the infant with a hammer, but only from self-defense and perhaps to teach him a lesson since the infant Chloe intended to hit him with a hammer ("He don't know me very well, do he?").

==References==


