[[Egede, Enugu]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places in Enugu State

Egede is one of the communities that makes the Udi Local Government Area(was one of the former Odo-Ozo Local Government Area) in Enugu State of Nigeria.  It is situated between Ebe town at the south, Umoka town at the north, Affa town at the west Okpatu town and Awhum town at the east.

==History==

Egede town is a member of the Ugwunye clan. Other members of the clan include Nike town and Affa town. Together, they constitute the off-springs of Amukwu.  The town has six villages: Anekeneze, Amozala, Okwum, Umuokpala, Umuanum and Umuovu. The town has two major segments or divides: Ikeghe and Ibite. The town's website can be located at www.egede.org.

==Feast==

The town has three major festivals. The first is the Odo festival. Although fast disappearing, the festivals here are associated with the return and departure of the Odo spirits. These occur every two years which typically mark the Odo seasons. The second festival is the famous age-grade ritual called Ogba,. Ogba means the rite of passage into adulthood. Although it is also open to women but it is substantively a male rite of passage. It takes place every ten years. Within that cycle, each segment of the village celebrates its own at a different date. The choice of any date is based on the traditional dating system also guided by the Igbo native weeks. The third festival is the New-Yam Festival called 'aka-ani' meaning the handshake with the goods of the land. Apparently, the gods that are responsible for the bountiful yam harvest. It is celebrated on every Saturday Orie of every September. The festival commemorates the harvest of the new yam.

==Religion==

Egede indigenes believe in the Odo deity before the coming of Christianity. Each village has its own special variant of the Odo and accordingly has a dedicated forest for the Odo. Odo Egede includes the nemaa (mother of spirits), the okpoakarika (the sporting and policing spirit) and the okwuikpe (the dancing spirit). The town has many indigenous catholic priests like Late Rev.Rev Prof Egbujie, Very Rev. Fr. John Nwafor, Late Rev. Fr. John Amuji, Rev. Fr. John Agu,Rev. Fr Edward Agu(Brother to Rev. Fr. John Agu)Rev. Fr. Hyacinth Egwuyi,Rev. Fr. Paul Ebuneoha, Rev Fr. Andrew Egbegolu, Very Rev. Fr. Isife Liberatus, Rev Fr Paul.IK Otakagu, Rev Fr. John Amadi and Rev. Fr. Anthony Oluba,rev. Fr.Kerian Onwuzu and Rev. Fr. Onochie Furthermore, Egede has reverend sisters like Rev Sister Scholastica Otakagu(DDL), Delta,Rev.sister Ramonda Onuoha DDL. Germany and Rev. sister Monica Igwe.  Egede has its own parish,Saint Cyril catholic church.

==Education==

There are three primary schools in Egede and they are Central school Amozala,community primary school Okwum and community primary school Umuovu.  Community secondary school Egede is the only one that serves the community.

