[[Lawren Pope]]

CATEGORIES: American fashion designers, 1987 births, Living people, American fashion businesspeople, People from Houston, Texas, Lee High School (Houston, Texas) alumni, Houston Baptist University alumni

Lawren Michele Pope in an American fashion designer. She is best known for the clothing line, Fuchsia,Fuchsia Fuchsia Official Website. Retrieved 2008-10-03. she began with Veronica Scott at age 14.

==Career==

Most notably, Pope is recognized for the design house Fuchsia that she and business partner Veronica Scott began in 2001. Veronica and Lawren have mentioned in several interviews that they were polar opposites when they met the first day of freshman year at Westside High School. Scott describes her style as "Abercrombie & Fitch", while her counterpart was more "Hot Topic."The Fuchsia Girls first interview Youtube. Retrieved 2008-10-04. Still, Lawren says that she is messy, while Veronica is highly organized, however their friendship was cemented by their mutual love of design. The Houston Chronicle has quoted Pope as saying, "Now we are inseparable; Over the years we've meshed into something."
Lawren and Veronica have since gained more notoriety since moving to California, and frequently attend events in both San Diego and Los Angeles. Neither girls have attended fashion school or have any formal training; and credited their grandmothers for having taught them how to sew."High School Friends Start Fashion Business" Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 2008-10-04.
Shortly after leaving Houston, Scott and Pope began Save the Girls; an organization dedicated to providing scholarships for girls interested in pursuing a degree in business. Save the Girls is funded through the collection of California Redemption Valued (CRV) recyclable items. The not-for-profit also has a curbside recycling service, offers free vocational training, and is an active participant in the conservation movement.Our Work Save the Girls. Retrieved 2008-10-04
Lawren was also signed to modeling agency, Page 713Page 713 Page Parkes Corporation. Retrieved 2008-10-04. (Page Parkes Modeling Agency), and appeared in print ads for companies such as Cingular and Hewlett Packard. Past talent also represented by Page Parkes include Alexis Bledel, Channing Tatum, and Angelina Jolie.Page Parkes Famous Faces. Retrieved 2008-10-04.
Pope has since left the agency to focus on her professional career. When speaking about Fuchsia, Lawren has said, "This is not just a tuba sitting in the back of my closet. I want to do this for a while."
In September 2008, Lawren announced that she and Veronica were in pre-production for their reality series "The Fuchsia Girls" set to air in the Spring of 2009. The show will follow Pope and Scott as they create a new collection, promote Save the Girls, and attend separate universities for the first time.

==Personal life==

The eldest of three, and the daughter of Lynn Michele Harris and Lawrence Lowell Pope Jr.Ancestry.com Harris County Births. Retrieved 2008-10-03. Pope was born and raised in Houston, Texas, where she attended both Westside and Lee High School."High School Friends Start Fashion Business" Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 2008-10-03. 
Following graduation in 2005, Lawren completed her freshman year of college at Houston Baptist University before relocating with Fuchsia's company headquarters to San Diego, California. There, Pope continues to expand the company and pursue an International Business degree.Fuchsia Fuchsia Official Website. Retrieved 2008-10-03

==References==

==External links==


