[[Tipton-Haynes State Historic Site]]

CATEGORIES: Houses on the National Register of Historic Places in Tennessee, Historic house museums in Tennessee, Museums in Washington County, Tennessee, Tennessee State Historic Sites, State of Franklin

Tipton-Haynes State Historic Site, known also as Tipton-Haynes House, is a Tennessee state-owned historic site located at 2620 South Roan Street near Johnson City, Tennessee.  It includes a house originally built in 1784 by Colonel John Tipton (1730–1813), and 10 other buildings, including a smokehouse, pigsty, loom house, still house, springhouse, log barn and corncrib.  There is also the home of George Haynes, a Haynes family slave.
Tipton led the opposition to the State of Franklin, an unsuccessful attempt by the Tennessee Valley residents to form a state in the mid-1780s.  In late February 1788, the so-called "Battle of Franklin" took place when a militia led by John Sevier, who had been elected governor of the proposed state, surrounded the Tipton farm and demanded the return of several slaves Tipton had confiscated. When Tipton refused, gunfire was exchanged, followed by a two-day standoff.  Sevier's forces were finally scattered by the Sullivan County militia.  The Franklin movement largely collapsed following this engagement.Kevin Barksdale, The Lost State of Franklin: America's First Secession (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2009), pp. 133-136.
Following Tipton's death in 1813, the farm passed to his son, John Tipton, Jr., who in turn sold it to a local land speculator, David Haynes, in 1837.  In 1840, Haynes gave the farm to his son, Landon Carter Haynes (1816–1875), as a wedding present.  This younger Haynes enlarged the house and added weatherboarding. A Confederate senator during the Civil War, Landon Carter Haynes faced death threats from East Tennessee Unionists, and was forced to flee the region in 1865.  He sold the farm to his brother-in-law, Jonesborough publisher Lawson Gifford.  In 1945, Gifford's grandson, David Simmerly, sold the farm to the Tennessee Historical Commission, though he continued living there until his death.James Bellamy, "The Political Career of Landon Carter Haynes," East Tennessee Historical Society Publications, Vol. 28 (1956), p. 105.
It is one of 17 Tennessee Historical Commission state-owned historic sites, and is operated by the Tipton-Haynes Association.  It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1970.

==References==

==External links==


