[[Ermineskin Cree Nation]]

CATEGORIES: First Nations governments in Alberta, Cree governments

Ermineskin Cree Nation, also known as the Ermineskin Tribe,Indian and Northern Affairs Canada "First Nation Detail" is a band government in Alberta, Canada, a western branch of the large Cree Nation, and a Treaty 6 nation.
As of 2008, there are 3,758 registered Ermineskin Cree, of which 2,606 were living on reserve.Ermineskin Tribe Population table at Indian and Northern Affairs Canada
The Ermineskin Cree Nations two reserves (around Maskwacis, Alberta) total about 22,512 hectares and lived in an area around Pigeon Lake and the Bear Hills (known in Cree as Maskwacheesihkare). Therefore they were called Maskwa Wachi-is Ininiwak, Maskwacheesihk Wiyiniwak or Amiskwacīwiyiniwak, meaning Bear Hills Cree. While the Ermineskin traditional territory includes the reserve lands, the reserve was formally established in 1885. The land houses substantial oil and gas deposits, agricultural land, and waterfront access to Pigeon Lake. The Canadian Pacific railway line runs through the reserve.
The First Nation took its name from Ermineskin (‘One with the skin like an ermine’,clue to his Métis descent, as the ermine fur is white in winter and brown in summer - as well as the skin of a Métis Sehkosowayanew, Sikosew Inew, also known as Baptiste Piche), Chief of the Bear Hills Cree. He was the son of Peechee (Pesew- ‘Mountain Lion’, also known as Louis Piche), Chief of the Asini Wachi Nehiyawak (Cree groups of the Rocky/Mountain Cree) and later head chief of the 'Rocky/Mountain Cree' (Asini Wachi Wi Iniwak or Asinīskāwiyiniwak)build up Asini Wachi Nehiyawak (Rocky Cree groups) and Asini Pwat-sak (Ye Xa Yabine or Hebina Assiniboine, Rocky Assiniboine groups) groups and also brother-in-law of Pitikwahanapiwiyin (′Poundmaker′), Chief of the River Cree (Sipi Wi Iniwak or Sīpīwininiwak). Ermineskin was the older brother of the well-known Keskayiwew (Kiskiyew, Kiskiyo - Bobtail, also known as Alexis Piche), who became Chief of the Bear Hills Cree after the death of Ermineskin and was elected instead of Maskepetoon ('Broken Arm') to the chieftainship of the Rocky Cree (Asini Wachi Wi Iniwak or Asinīskāwiyiniwak) and became later head chief of the Western Cree (‘Pakisimotan Wi Iniwak’) and soon after head chief of all the groups of the Upstream People (Natimiw Iyiniwak or Natimiyininiwak).

==Indian Reserves==

There are two Indian reserves under the governance of the band:Indian and Northern Affairs Canada "Reserves/Settlements/Villages Detail"
Pigeon Lake IR No. 138A is shared with three other governments, the Samson First Nation, the Louis Bull First Nation and the Montana First Nation.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


