[[Arthur Koestler]]

CATEGORIES: 1905 births, 1983 deaths, Arthur Koestler, Parapsychologists, British anti-communists, British novelists, British people of the Spanish Civil War, British political writers, Hungarian anti-communists, Hungarian people of the Spanish Civil War, Hungarian political writers, Communists, Khazar studies, Jewish novelists, Historians of Jews and Judaism, Commanders of the Order of the British Empire, Writers who committed suicide, Philosophers who committed suicide, Male suicides, Joint suicides, People with Parkinson's disease, Drug-related suicides in England, Soldiers of the French Foreign Legion, Consciousness researchers and theorists, Mystics, German-language writers, British Jewish writers, British Zionists, Yiddish-speaking people, Hungarian Jews, Hungarian people of Russian descent, Hungarian people of Czech descent, Hungarian emigrants to the United Kingdom, British people of Hungarian-Jewish descent, British people of Russian descent, British people of Russian-Jewish descent, People from Pest, Hungary, Ashkenazi Jews

Arthur Koestler, CBE (5 September 1905 – 1 March 1983) was a Hungarian-British author and journalist. Koestler was born in Budapest and, apart from his early school years, was educated in Austria. In 1931 Koestler joined the Communist Party of Germany until, disillusioned by Stalinism, he resigned in 1938. In 1940 he published his novel Darkness at Noon, an anti-totalitarian work, which gained him international fame. Over the next 43 years from his residence in Great Britain, Koestler espoused many political causes and wrote novels, memoirs, biographies, and numerous essays. In 1968, he was awarded the Sonning Prize "for outstanding contribution to European culture" and, in 1972, he was made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE). In 1976, Koestler was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease and, in 1979, with terminal leukaemia.A. & C. Koestler (ACK) Stranger on the Square, London: Hutchinson 1984, ISBN 978-0-09-154330-3, p. 10. In 1983 he and his wife committed suicide at home in London.

==Life==

===Origins and early life===

Koestler was born in Budapest to Henrik and Adele Koestler (née Jeiteles). He was an only child.  His father Henrik Koestler, of Jewish Hungarian descent, was born on 18 August 1869 in the town of Miskolc in northeastern Hungary. According to Koestler's authorized biography, Henrik's father, Leopold Koestler, was a soldier in the Austro-Hungarian Army who Magyarised his name to "Lipot".[ref]
  
