[[Sergio Di Zio]]

CATEGORIES: 1972 births, Living people, Male actors from Toronto, Canadian male film actors, Canadian people of Italian descent, Canadian male stage actors, Canadian male television actors, Canadian male voice actors

Sergio Di Zio (born September 20, 1972 in Toronto, Ontario, Canada) is a Canadian actor. He starred in the television series Flashpoint as Michelangelo "Spike" Scarlatti until the show concluded on December 13, 2012.
Di Zio's other works include The Lookout, Cinderella Man, Senior Trip; the television series This is Wonderland, Northern Town; as a voice actor for the animated series Stoked and Babar and the Adventures of Badou. He also appeared in the stage debut of Leo written by Rosa Laborde for which he received a Dora Award nomination in 2006.

==Career==

Di Zio is best known for playing Michelangelo Scarlatti, nicknamed "Spike", on the CTV police drama Flashpoint. Prior to landing his breakthrough role, however, he has appeared in over 30 movies and TV series.  After making his debut in the 1995 film Senior Trip, Di Zio appeared in a string of telepics including The Wall, Major Crime, Freak City, Rembrandt: Fathers & Sons, and RFK.  Additionally, he guest starred on other Canadian series, such as Murdoch Mysteries, Republic of Doyle, and even played "Ripper" on Stoked for 11 episodes.
His appearances in film include Ron Howard's Cinderella Man, Boondock Saints, Flash of Genius, and the Independent Spirit Awards winning The Lookout, playing Deputy Ted. Di Zio has starred in Just Buried, 19 Months and the Peter Wellington film, Luck, winner of the South by Southwest Film Festival.
Sergio’s TV movie appearances include Robert Ludlum's Covert One: The Hades Factor, John Stamos' The Wedding Wars and the Fox biopic RFK, where he played Robert Kennedy’s adviser and speechwriter Adam Walinsky.
In July 2012, he made a brief appearance in the show The Listener' as Spike, the same Spike in Flashpoint. The episode is Now You See Him.

==Filmography==

==External links==


