[[Fetish model]]

CATEGORIES: BDSM terminology, Sexual fetishism, Fetish clothing, Modeling

A fetish model is a model who models fetish clothing or devices that augment his or her body in a fetish manner or in fetishistic situations, though he or she may not work exclusively in that form of modeling.
Many fetish models display what are termed fetish fashions, which are clothing styles that considered extreme and provocative, designed to elicit a strong emotional reaction or desire on the part of the observer.  Such clothing range from exotic stylized bathing suits to extreme costuming including body armor and sci-fi fantasy suits.
Fetish modeling may involve bondage, body modification, fetish photography and exotic glamour photography as well as sexual fantasy costuming (i.e. maid's outfits, nurses, etc.). Fetish models may model for photography, and appear at BDSM fairs and parties.
The sex industry consists of businesses which either directly or indirectly provide sex-related products and services or adult entertainment. The sex industry includes adult sex-related products and services such as prostitution, pornography, sex shops, strip clubs, sex-oriented men's magazines, and sex movies and sex channels for television. BDSM is also a big part of the Sex Industry known as a fetish model which has become a big market.
Several pornographic actors and glamour models also act as fetish models.

==Types of fetish models==

Fetish modelling covers a wide range of fetishes, including those involving bondage, latex, corsets, even wedgies, tattoo/body piercing, shoes, thin fetishism, shibari, and Nyotaimori / food. Fetishes may also involve body parts, such as breasts, navel, feet, etc.
Fetish models are usually considered to be different category to gothic or alternative models, who are usually far more niche specific.  Fetish models may only involve themselves in the overall aesthetic aspects rather than a specific area such as sexual.  Fetish modelling is usually considered to be a part of the adult industry due to its popular perception as an "adult only" appreciation.  However in recent times, many aspects of the fetish fashion market have been incorporated and accepted into so called mainstream fashion whereby fashion creators will directly use exotic fabrics such as latex or sheer instead of cotton or wool for their creations.
Fetish usually relates to anything that can cause an interest or desire on the part of the observer/participant that is not limited to be part of a person.  For example, a person who wears boots can be considered a fetish as it is NOT merely the person that others are interested in per se but the image that the person has while wearing the boots.  The same is true of a person who engages in selective bodily appreciation i.e., foot fetish they are attracted specifically not to the entire person but may just be intensely appreciative of that person's feet.
Thus fetish appreciation is very subjective and what stimulates one individual may not interest others if not directly openly repulse another as in more extreme appreciations such as scat.

==Popular culture==

There have been several notable performers and producers of both the bondage and fetish area who have attained mainstream notability.  The most recognized is the 1950s bondage model and pin-up girl, Bettie Page who posed for photographer Irving Klaw for mail-order photographs and was subsequently featured in Playboy.
Essex, Karen, and James L. Swanson, Bettie Page: The Life of a Pin-Up Legend. Los Angeles: General Publishing Group, 1996. ISBN 1-881649-62-8Foster, Richard, The Real Bettie Page: The Truth About the Queen of the Pinups. Secaucus, N.J.: Carol Publishing Group/Birch Lane Press, 1997. ISBN 1-55972-432-3
In the 1960s the popular British TV program, The Avengers incorporated much fetish costuming for their lead female performers including Diana Rigg's famous leather catsuits and leotards as well as Tara King's continual thigh-length boots and shoulder length leather gloves.

==Markets==

There are specialized publications that feature and promote fetish models, including Skin Two, Secret, Italian A Magazine (not to be confused with the now defunct A(sian) Magazine), and Marquis.
Fetish models may run personal adult pay websites and are featured on fetish adult pay sites.
There are also fetish fashion designers. Most of these designers employ fetish models for their clothing line. There are even fetish fashion shows hosted several times a year, including Vex, The Baroness, Skintwo, and House of Harlot.

==Awards==

In recent years, the annual SIGNY awards have been awarded to the bondage models voted as the best of that year. The SIGNY award winners for best bondage models to date have been:

==See also==

==References==


