[[True Love Always]]

CATEGORIES: American pop music groups, Indie pop groups from Virginia

True Love Always is a pop band formed in Charlottesville, Virginia in 1995, with a mission to play only love songs.Allmusic.com entry for True Love Always  Heavily influenced by Joao Gilberto, Dionne Warwick and Earth, Wind and Fire, their sound was at odds with much of the more macho indie-rock gaining popularity at the time.  The band has been associated with TeenBeat Records for their entire existence.

==History==

Original members Matt Datesman (drums), John Lindaman (guitar and vocals) and Tobin Rodriguez (bass and vocals) began experimenting with softer sounding music after the breakup of Charlottesville rock band Operation:Love!, which featured Lindaman and Datesman in a louder rock context.  Soon after their first show, in November 1995, they opened for TeenBeat Records act (and major influence) Versus at the Tokyo Rose in Charlottesville; TeenBeat Records honcho (and Lindaman's high-school classmate) Mark Robinson was there, and was impressed by their two song cassette featuring the song "Mediterranean".  He asked them to record Mediterranean as a single for TeenBeat, beginning their long association with the label which continues to the present.
After several albums, singles and a few tours, Rodriguez left the band in 1999.  After a few tours of the U.S. and Japan with substitute bassists including Jeff Grosfeld and Fred Kovey, bassist Tony Zanella joined in 2000, touring, recording some singles and the album Clouds.  Shortly after recording Clouds in 2002, the band went on an indefinite hiatus as Lindaman moved to New York, Datesman became a father, and Zanella completed his Masters degree in Philosophy. In 2007, the band began working on new material, but at a much slower pace then their former methods allowed. Datesman continues to record and perform occasionally with Flin Flon; Zanella continues to tour with +/-."The Love Minivan", Cville Weekly, 2007  Lindaman performs regularly with a number of groups in New York City, including Latin Hustle, The Solitary Cyclist, and The Instruments, as well as recording experimental instrumental improvisations under his own name.

==Recordings==

Singles:

Mediterranean 1996

Take Me Over 1997

Secret Scenes 1998(Motorway label, Japan)

Buried Treasure 1999

Windows Fade 2000(promotional Japan tour 7", co-released with Rover Records)

Albums:

When Will You Be Mine? 1997

Hopefully 1998

Torch 2000

Spring Collection 2001

Clouds 2003

Very Important Love Songs 2006 (Thai label Smallroom career retrospective)

Compilations:

TeenBeat compilations from 1997 to the present

All's Fair in Love and Chickfactor

==External links==

TeenBeat Records http://www.teenbeat.net  

True Love Always Myspace page http://www.myspace.com/officialtla

==References==


