[[Rodger Doxsey]]

CATEGORIES: 1947 births, 2009 deaths, People from Schenectady, New York, American physicists, American astronomers, Massachusetts Institute of Technology alumni, People from Cuyahoga County, Ohio, People from Towson, Maryland

Rodger Evans DoxseyPosition and Short Term Time Variability of Her X-1, The Smithsonian/NASA Astrophysics Data System, 1974. (March 11, 1947 – October 13, 2009)Overbye, Dennis: Rodger Doxsey, 62, Astronomer Who Worked on the Hubble, Dies, The New York Times, October 18, 2009. Accessed October 20, 2009. was an American physicist and astronomer who made major contributions to the scientific and operational success of NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST). He joined the HST Project at NASA's Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI), located at the Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland, in 1981, and was head of the Hubble Missions Office at his death.Baltimore Sun, October 15, 2009.  "Rodger Doxsey, one of space telescope team's first leaders, dies at 62",
Of Doxsey, STScI Director Matt Mountain said, "Rodger was the heart and soul of Hubble here at the Institute....   He ... knew everything about the space telescope, from the smallest anomaly to the breadth of the extraordinary science delivered by the telescope he had worked with for over 28 years."

==Career at MIT==

Dr. Doxsey was born in Schenectady, New York, raised in Cleveland Heights, Ohio and earned his Ph.D. in physics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  After his doctorate, he worked at MIT on the third NASA Small Astronomy Satellite (SAS 3), an X-ray astronomy mission, and then on the first High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO 1), which was launched in August 1977.

==Work at STScI==

The Institute's first director, Riccardo Giacconi, hired Doxsey nine years before the HST launch in 1990, to be the mission operations scientist. During the following years he was responsible for mission science specifications and requirements, data calibration, operational planning and scheduling, as well as the actual day-to-day commanding of the observatory. Doxsey worked on the development of new, state-of-the-art instruments for HST with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, which contributed to the enormous advance made in Hubble's scientific capabilities after launch, by replacing, in the course of several Space Shuttle visits from 1993 to May 2009, the original suite of instruments which had been specified and designed on the basis of technology that was many years old by the time HST finally became operational. Doxsey was also responsible for hiring many of the STScI's staff.

==Awards and honors==

Among Doxsey's many awards and honors, especially notable are:

==References==

==External links==


