[[Dulafid dynasty]]

CATEGORIES: Arab dynasties, Muslim dynasties, 9th century in Iran, People of the Abbasid Caliphate

The Dulafid or Dolafid dynasty was an Arab dynasty that served as governors of Jibal for the Abbasid caliphs in the 9th century. During the weakening of the authority of the caliphs after 861, their rule in Jibal became increasingly independent of the central government in Samarra. In the last decade of the 9th century, however, they were defeated by the Abbasids who proceeded to reincorporate Jibal into their empire.

==History==

The Dulafids belonged to the Arab tribe of 'Ejl ibn Lojaym. The family is first mentioned in the early 8th century as traders residing in Kufa, Iraq. There are dubious records that they supported the Abbasid family in its struggles against the Ummayad caliphs. They later moved to the Zagros region, where they resorted to highway robbery. Eventually they adopted a more legitimate lifestyle and settled in Karaj. Over time their holdings around Karaj became extensive, and by the 9th century they possessed large tracts of cultivated land, palaces and fortresses.
The first Dulafid to become governor of Jibal was Abu Dulaf al-Qasim, who was appointed to the position by the caliph Harun al-Rashid. He sided with Harun al-Rashid's successor al-Amin in the civil war against the latter's brother al-Ma'mun, was pardoned after the defeat of al-Amin and retained his post. He maintained good relations with the caliphs until his death in 840. His son and grandsons succeeded him in his position as governor of Jibal.
As Abbasid authority in the peripheral provinces broke down in the middle of the century (the "Anarchy at Samarra"), Jibal under the Dulafids became increasingly independent. Ahmad ibn 'Abd al-Aziz (governor 879-893) played an influential role in the wars between the Abbasids and the Saffarid dynasty of Sistan, generally siding with the former. After his death, however, his sons fought amongst themselves over his holdings, presenting an opportunity to the Abbasids to retake Jibal province. Despite offering a sustained resistance, the Dulafids ultimately lost the province in 897.Donner, Fred M. Dolafids. Encyclopaedia Iranica. Ed. Ehsan Yarshater. Columbia University. Retrieved 8 October 2008.

==Rulers==

==See also==

==References==


