[[Black Widow (Marvel Comics)]]

CATEGORIES: Characters created by Don Heck, Characters created by Stan Lee, Characters created by Mark Millar, Fictional American people of Chinese descent, Fictional KGB agents, Fictional assassins, Fictional Russian people, Fictional secret agents and spies, Fictional special forces personnel, Marvel Comics characters who use magic, Marvel Comics superheroes, Marvel Comics supervillains, Marvel Comics martial artists, Marvel Comics titles, Comics about spiders

Black Widow is the name of several fictional super heroines appearing in comic books published by Marvel Comics. Most of these versions exist in Marvel's main shared universe, known as the Marvel Universe.

==Claire Voyant==

Claire Voyant is one of the first costumed, superpowered female protagonists in comics. Created by writer George Kapitan and artist Harry Sahle, she first appeared in Mystic Comics #4 (Aug. 1940). The character is an antihero - and can even be viewed as a villain, who kills evildoers to deliver their souls to Satan, her master. The character is unrelated to the later Marvel Comics superheroines who took on the codenames.

==Natalia Romanova / Natasha Romanoff==

Natalia "Natasha" Alianovna RomanovaWolverine: Origins #16 (Sep. 2007) is the first character to take on the Black Widow codename in the modern mainstream Marvel Comics. She was created by editor and plotter Stan Lee, scripter Don Rico and artist Don Heck, and first appeared in Tales of Suspense #52 (April 1964). The character has been associated with several superhero teams in the Marvel Universe, including the Avengers, the Defenders, the Champions, S.H.I.E.L.D., and the Thunderbolts. She has appeared in many other forms of media, including the major motion pictures Iron Man 2, The Avengers, Captain America: The Winter Soldier and Avengers: Age of Ultron, where she was portrayed by actress Scarlett Johansson.

==Yelena Belova==

Yelena Belova is the second Black Widow in the modern mainstream comics who debuted briefly in Inhumans #5 (March 1999). She was fully introduced in the 1999 Marvel Knights mini-series Black Widow. A second miniseries, also titled Black Widow and featuring Natasha Romanoff and Daredevil, followed in 2001. The next year, she did a solo turn in her own three-issue miniseries titled Black Widow: Pale Little Spider under the mature-audience Marvel MAX imprint. This June to August 2002 story arc, by writer Greg Rucka and artist Igor Kordey, was a flashback to the story of her becoming the second modern 'Black Widow', in events preceding her Inhumans appearance.

==Monica Chang==

Monica Chang-Fury is the second Black Widow in the Ultimate Marvel continuity that appears in Ultimate Comics: Avengers. Despite the painful memories associated with the previous Black Widow (Natasha Romanoff), she refuses to change her codename. It is revealed that Monica is Asian-American and was Nick Fury's ex-wife after the marriage fell apart after she discovered that he had been sleeping with various female members of her family and limited social circle, including her own mother.
With the Avengers, she and others led a mission to re-capture Captain America and then ends up facing and fighting against the Red Skull.Ultimate Avengers #1-6 She also helps capture and recruit the Punisher into the team.Ultimate Avengers 2 #1 She was an active member of the team throughout their missions. Monica was transferred to the New Ultimates, where she was immediately pitted against her former teammates when Fury was discovered for supposedly selling S.H.I.E.L.D. secrets (but was actually framed by Gregory Stark).Ultimate Avengers vs New Ultimates #1-6 After Fury returned as director of S.H.I.E.L.D., he reassembled the Ultimates and Monica joined the team, moving with her (and Fury's) child Julius Chang to the Triskelion.Ultimate Comics: Ultimates #1 She is currently the Director of S.H.I.E.L.D. by order of President Captain America.Ultimate comics: Ultimates #21 She later gives Fury and Abigail Brand permission to restart the "Howling Commandos" to combat HYDRA's threat.Ultimate comics: Ultimates #22

==Ultimate Spider-Woman==

===Earth-616===

The Earth-616 version of Monica Chang from Marvel's mainstream Earth-616 continuity appears in the Avengers A.I. series.Doran, Michael (March 20, 2013). "Marvel Announces ULTRON-Spin-off AVENGERS A.I. Ongoing". Newsarama.
Monica Chang is the chief of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s A.I. Division. Monica Chang enlists Henry Pym to help her stop Dimitrios (who evolved from the fail-safe virus used to defeat Ultron at the end of the Age of Ultron storyline) and they form the Avengers A.I. consisting of a Doombot, Victor Mancha, and Vision. During their first mission, the Avengers A.I. faced hijacked S.H.I.E.L.D. Drones which attacked a hospital in Atlanta.Avengers A.I. #1
As of issue 4, it is revealed she is a devout Muslim.Avengers A.I. #4

==References==


