[[Nsit-Atai]]

CATEGORIES: Local Government Areas in Akwa Ibom State, Populated places in Akwa Ibom State

Nsit Atai Local government area was created in 1996 with its capital at Odot by the government of president Ibrahim Babangida. It has an area of out of an about 17,000 square kilometers, with 62 villages.
Location
Nsit Atai is located in south east Akwa Ibom State of Nigeria and is a local government area of Akwa Ibom state. It is approximately 50 kilometers from Uyo, the capital of Akwa Ibom state. It is bounded in the north by Uruan, in the east by Okobo, in the west by Ibesikpo Asutan Ekpe Local Government Area. It is on the Coordinates: 4°51′0″N 8°01′0″E
Government and politics
Representative: Rt Hon. Sarah Sunday Elijah
Paramount Ruler: HRH Edidem Akpan Udofia Ntuen
Chairman: Mark Esset
People
Nsit Atai People are Ibibio outlined extraction with Ibibio language as the main spoken language. Cultural influences include Ekpo, Ekong, Eko-ong Utah, Egre and other traditional dances.
Population
According to the 2006 census result Nsit Atai can conveniently boast of a population of Males - 37,318; Females - 74,595. A total of 101,915 people.
Education
Nsit Atai Local Government Area has decent levels of educational institutions. They are pre-primary, primary and secondary schools. There are 13 pre-primary schools, 25 primary schools, 9 secondary schools and 26 adult education centers. Most of the schools are in decaying and deplorable conditions. Teacher student ratio is 1:50 students per class.
Health
Nsit Atai has 1 comprehensive Health Care center, 1 primary health center and 2 health posts. Some of the centers have been adequately equipped in terms of physical structures, facilities/equipment and personnel.
Natural Resources
Mineral resources include crude oil deposits, commercial quantity of salt and high quality clay. '''
Agricultural resources include plantain oil palm and palm produce. Preponderance of hard wood, timber and wild life. Agriculture provides employment and means of livelihood to the people of Nsit Atai. The land is generally fertile but the fertility rate is very low due to continuous activities which results in low productivity, income and low standard of living.
Investment Opportunities
Nsit Atai is a Local Government with high investment potentials as mineral resources that include crude oil deposits, commercial quantity of salt and high quality clay are available.

