[[AnyLogic]]

CATEGORIES: Simulation software, Mac OS software, Science software for OS X, Science software for Windows, Science software for Linux, Agent-based software, 2000 software

AnyLogic is a multimethod simulation modeling tool developed by The AnyLogic Company (former XJ Technologies).

==History of AnyLogic==

In the beginning of 1990s there was a big interest in the mathematical approach to modeling and simulation of parallel processes. This approach may be applied to the analysis of correctness of parallel and distributed programs. The Distributed Computer Network (DCN) research group at Saint Petersburg Technical University developed such a software system for the analysis of program correctness; the new tool was named COVERS (Concurrent Verification and Simulation). This system allowed graphical modeling notation for system structure and behavior. The tool was applied for the research granted by Hewlett Packard (?).
In 1998 the success of this research inspired the DCN laboratory to organize a company with a mission to develop a new age simulation software. The emphasis in the development was placed on applied methods: simulation, performance analysis, behavior of stochastic systems, optimization and visualization. New software released in 2000 was based on the latest advantages of information technologies: an object-oriented approach, elements of the UML standard, the use of Java, a modern GUI, etc. 
The tool was named AnyLogic, because it supported all three well-known modeling approaches:
+ Any combination of these approaches within a single model.Andrei Borshchev, Alexei Filippov. From System Dynamics and Discrete Event to Practical Agent Based Modeling: Reasons, Techniques, Tools,The 22nd International Conference of the System Dynamics Society, July 25–29, 2004, Oxford, England
The first version of AnyLogic was AnyLogic 4, because the numbering continues the numbering of COVERS 3.0.
A big step was taken in 2003, when AnyLogic 5 was released. It was focused on business simulation in the following domains:
The latest major version, AnyLogic 7, was released in 2014.The news on the company’s official website. The platform for AnyLogic 7 model development environment is Eclipse. AnyLogic 7 is a cross-platform simulation software as far as it works on Windows, Mac OS and Linux.The full system requirements list on the official web-site.

==AnyLogic and Java==

AnyLogic includes a graphical modeling language and also allows the user to extend simulation models with Java code. The Java nature of AnyLogic lends itself to custom model extensions via Java coding as well as the creation of Java applets which can be opened with any standard browser.  These applets make AnyLogic models very easy to share or place on websites. In addition to Java applets the Professional version allows for the creation of Java runtime applications which can be distributed to users. These pure Java applications can be a base for decision support tools.Christian Wartha, Momtchil Peev, Andrei Borshchev, Alexei Filippov. Decision Support Tool Supply Chain, Proceedings of the 2002 Winter Simulation Conference, 2002

==Multimethod simulation modeling==

AnyLogic models can be based on any of the main simulation modeling paradigms: discrete event or process-centric (DE), systems dynamics (SD), and agent-based (AB).
System dynamics and discrete event are traditional simulation approaches, agent based is new. Technically, the system dynamics approach deals mostly with continuous processes whereas "discrete event" (by which we mean all descendants of GPSS also known as process-centric simulation approach) and agent based models work mostly in discrete time, i.e. jump from one event to another. 
System dynamics and discrete event simulation historically have been taught at universities to very different groups of students, namely management and economy, industrial and operation research engineers. As a result, there are two distinct practitioners' communities that never talk to each other. 
Agent based modeling until recently has been mostly a purely academic topic. However, the increasing demand for global business optimization caused leading modelers looking at combined approaches to gain a deeper insight into complex interdependent processes having very different natures.
How modeling approaches correspond to the abstraction levels. System dynamics dealing with aggregates is obviously used at the highest abstraction level. Discrete event modeling is used at low to middle abstraction. As for agent based modeling, this technology is used across all abstraction levels, and agent may model objects of very diverse nature and scale: at the "physical" level agents may be e.g. pedestrians or cars or robots, at the middle level – customers, at the highest level – competing companies.Yuri G. Karpov. "AnyLogic – a New Generation Professional Simulation Tool", VI International Congress on Mathematical Modeling, September 20-26th, 2004, NizniNovgorog, Russia
AnyLogic allows the modeler to combine these simulation approaches within the same model.  There is no fixed hierarchy.  So, as an example, one could create a model of the package shipping industry where carriers are modeled as agents acting/reacting independently whereas the inner workings of their transport and infrastructure networks could be modeled with discrete event simulation.  Similarly, one can model consumers as agents whose aggregate behavior feed a systems dynamics model capturing flows such as revenues or costs which do not need to be tied to individual agents.  This mixed language approach is directly applicable to a wide variety of complex modeling problems that may be modeled via any one approach albeit with compromises.

==Simulation language==

The AnyLogic simulation language consists of following items:AnyLogic on-line help on official vendor web-site
The language also includes: low level modeling constructions (variables, equations, parameters, events etc.), presentation shapes (lines, polylines, ovals etc.), analysis facilities (datasets, histograms, plots), connectivity tools, standard images, and experiments frameworks.

==AnyLogic libraries==

AnyLogic includes the following standard libraries:
Beside of these standard libraries user can create his own libraries and distribute them.

==See also==

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==


