[[Spidercam]]

CATEGORIES: Film and video technology

The Spidercam is a system which enables film and television cameras to move both vertically and horizontally over a predetermined area, typically the playing field of a sporting event such as a cricket pitch, football field or a tennis court. The name "Spidercam" is a trademark. The Spidercam is very similar to the Skycam, which preceded it, having been invented in the United States in 1984.
The Spidercam operates with four motorized winches positioned at each corner at the base of the covered area, each of which controls a Kevlar cable connected to a gyro-stabilized camera-carrier, or dolly.  By controlling the winding and unwinding of the cables, the system allows the dolly to reach any position in the three-dimensional space.  The inputs of the Spidercam "pilot" are processed by software which forwards the commands to the winches via fiber optic cables.  Two of the Kevlar cables also have fiber optic cables woven into them to carry commands to the camera and the remote head, and bring the camera's high definition signal back to the control station. The remote head, which houses the camera, provides pan and tilt movement and includes the lens remote which controls focus, zoom and irising. A gyro sensor in the dolly stabilises the horizon. A specially trained Spidercam camera operator controls the camera.

==History==

Jens C. Peters, the founder of CCSytems Inc., developed the Spidercam system.  The Austrian company began in 2000 specifically to create a fully functional cable-suspension system for a camera transporting device, capable of moving not only laterally or horizontally along the ground, but also vertically, thus providing full three-dimensional movement while covering wide areas both indoors as well as outdoors, using standardised and reliable components as modules.
The first successful test of the system took place in a large event hall in Carinthia, Austria in 2003. In 2004 the system was employed for the first time on a television production in Austria. That same year, Peters teamed up with the German company PMT Professional Motion Technology GmbH, a rental house specialized in camera motion technology. After some modifications inspired by PMT, the Spidercam entered the market. Its initial uses were for live events such as concerts—Kylie Minogue in Australia, Robbie Williams in Great Britain and The Police in Argentina—television programs such as the Eurovision Song Contest in Greece and Finland, and major sporting events such as the European Swimming Cup in Hungary, Red Bull X-Fighters in Mexico and Spain and international football matches. PMT also provides a system for 35mm film cameras.
A new partner, the Austrian businessman Herbert Neff, joined Peters in 2007 and a new company, Spidercam GmbH, was founded. Since then further business relationships have been created in a number of countries, such as Sweden, Great Britain, France, Portugal, Italy, Poland, Tunisia, Australia and China, which provide staff, equipment and local know-how for the broadcast and film-production companies in those countries. To meet the growing demand for spidercam services, spidercam GmbH offers workshops for prospective operators, with the goal of guaranteeing the highest quality and safety standards.
Spidercam Gmbh has an in-house engineering department which works on improving the Spidercam and developing special applications to meet customer requests. Currently[tpl]when|date=May 2012[/tpl] work is being done on a completely revised and new system, to be called spidercam MkII.
In cricket, Spidercam was first used in the Indian Cricket League (ICL), followed by the semi-finals of the 2010 Indian Premier League (IPL) in Mumbai and then in Champions League Twenty20 in South Africa. It was used for the first time in a test match at The Gabba in Brisbane during the 2012 South African tour of Australia.Channel Nine Television coverage Monday 12th November

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


