[[Tai Po Lookout Tower]]

CATEGORIES: Tai Po, Towers in China, Visitor attractions in Hong Kong, Buildings and structures in Hong Kong

Tai Po Lookout Tower (香港回歸紀念塔) is one of the large-scale landmarks established for the commemoration of the transfer of sovereignty of Hong Kong to the PRC in 1997.Solotour [tpl]zh icon[/tpl] It is located near the mouth of the Lam Tsuen River and next to the shore of Tolo Harbour, within Tai Po Waterfront Park, in Tai Po, Hong Kong,
Unlike the similarly named but unrelated Tai Po Lookout which is now a private residential place, Tai Po Lookout Tower, by years, has become a famous tourist spot in the New Territories. The building is 32.4 meters high. Visitors can reach the top to take a bird's eye view upon Tolo Harbour, the entire Tai Po Waterfront Park and the neighboring Tai Po Industrial Estate.
At the lower part of the tower there is an inscriptional record to mark down the meaning of its establishment: The inhabitants of the New Territories defended and sacrificed themselves for their own home in the early period when Hong Kong was ceded to Great Britain in 1898. They devoted to the development of the territory and significantly made a great contribution into society after the war time of Hong Kong falling into Japan's hands during the period of time from December 1941 to August 1945. The inscription also points out that the location of the tower is exactly where the English government made a landing when taking over the New Territories, the tower, therefore, was built at the same place for the commemoration of the sovereignty handover.

==Access==

Tolo Habor is in-between Tai Po Kau, the area where Tai Po Lookout is located in, and the Tai Po Waterfront Park. After visiting the Lookout, visitors may also have an enjoyment of traveling around the Tai Po Lookout Tower in which visitors are able to have a rather different point of view upon Tai Po and Tolo Habour, and have a comparison on the architectural styles of both buildings situated in the same district but established in different times. Since there is no transportation (except taxi) from the Lookout directly heading for the Lookout Tower, having change of bus in Tai Po Market is necessary. By rough calculation, it takes about 40 minutes.

==See also==

==References==


