[[Raymond E. Johns, Jr.]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, Living people, People from Washington Township, Bergen County, New Jersey, Recipients of the Distinguished Service Medal (United States), Recipients of the Legion of Merit, United States Air Force Academy alumni, United States Air Force generals, Recipients of the Aerial Achievement Medal, Recipients of the Air Medal, Recipients of the Defense Superior Service Medal, White House Fellows

General Raymond Edward Johns Jr., USAF (born December 7, 1954)Marquis Who's Who on the Web is former Commander, Air Mobility Command. He previously served as the Air Force's Deputy Chief of Staff for Strategic Plans and Programs from October 2006 to November 16, 2009. General Johns leads Air Mobility Command's mission to provide rapid, global mobility and sustainment for America's armed forces. The command also plays a crucial role in providing humanitarian support at home and around the world. The men and women of AMC - active duty, Air National Guard, Air Force Reserve and civilians - provide airlift, aerial refueling, special air mission and aeromedical evacuation. Johns retired with an effective date of January 1, 2013.
General Johns graduated from the U.S. Air Force Academy in 1977. His aviation career includes T-38 and C-141 instructor pilot, as well as the chief test pilot and test program manager for the VC-25 Air Force One Replacement Program. He was chosen as a White House Fellow in 1991 where he was a senior staff member in the Office of National Service. The general has served at Headquarters U.S. European Command in security assistance and congressional affairs, and at Headquarters U.S. Pacific Command as Deputy Director of Strategic Plans and Policy. Within Headquarters U.S. Air Force, he served as Deputy Director and, later, Director of Air Force Programs. The general commanded a test squadron, operations group and airlift wing, and he was the Director of Mobility Forces for operations in Bosnia.
General Johns is a command pilot and experimental test pilot with 4,500 flying hours in a variety of aircraft.

==Education==

Johns grew up in Washington Township, Bergen County, New Jersey and attended Westwood Regional High School.Fard, Maggie Fazeli. "Washington Township native named newest four-star general", The Record (Bergen County), December 31, 2009. Accessed December 22, 2013. "Johns, Jr., the eldest child of Doris and Raymond Johns, Sr., grew up in Township of Washington with his younger brother, Kevin, and sister, Susan. He attended Westwood High School, where he met his future wife, Diana, and discovered what he wanted to do for the rest of his life."
In 1977, Johns earned a Bachelor of Science in aeronautical engineering from the United States Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, Colorado. He graduated from Squadron Officer School, Maxwell AFB, Alabama in 1982. In 1988, he completed a Master of Science in Administration from Central Michigan University. He has also received education and training at the Air Command and Staff College; the U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School at Edwards AFB in California; the Defense Systems Management College; the Industrial College of the Armed Forces at Fort Lesley J. McNair in Washington, D.C.; the National Security Management Course at Syracuse University; and the Program for Senior Executives in National and International Security Management at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government.

==Assignments==

==Summary of joint assignments==

==Flight information==

==Major awards and decorations==

==Promotion dates==

==References==

==External links==


