[[The Long Voyage Home]]

CATEGORIES: 1940 films, 1940s war films, American films, English-language films, Black-and-white films, Films directed by John Ford, Plays by Eugene O'Neill, Seafaring films, United Artists films, War drama films, World War II films made in wartime, World War II navy films

The Long Voyage Home is a 1940 American drama film directed by John Ford. It features John Wayne, Thomas Mitchell, Ian Hunter, Barry Fitzgerald, Wilfrid Lawson, John Qualen, Mildred Natwick, and Ward Bond, among others.[tpl]Imdb title|id=0032728|title=The Long Voyage Home[/tpl].
The film was adapted by Dudley Nichols from the plays The Moon of the Caribees, In The Zone, Bound East for Cardiff, and The Long Voyage Home by Eugene O'Neill. The original plays by Eugene O'Neill were written around the time of World War I and were among his earliest plays.  Ford set the story for the motion picture, however, during World War II.Steeman, Albert. Internet Encyclopedia of Cinematographers, "Gregg Toland page," Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2007. Last accessed: January 18, 2008.
The picture tells the story of the crew and passengers aboard a freighter.

==Plot==

The film tells the story of the crew aboard a British cargo ship named the SS Glencairn, during World War II, on the long voyage home from the West Indies to Baltimore and then to England. The ship carries a cargo of high-explosives.
On liberty, after a night of drinking in bars in the West Indies, the crew returns to the tramp steamer and set sail for Baltimore.
They're a motley group: a middle-aged Irishman Driscoll (Thomas Mitchell), a young Swedish ex-farmer Ole Olsen (John Wayne), the spiteful steward Cocky (Barry Fitzgerald); the brooding Lord Jim-like Englishman Smitty (Ian Hunter), and others.
After the ship picks up a load of dynamite in Baltimore, the rough seas they encounter become nerve-racking to the crew.
They're also concerned that Smitty might be a German spy because he's secretive. After they force Smitty to show them his letters from home it turns out that Smitty is an alcoholic who has run away from his family. When they near port, a German plane attacks the ship, killing Smitty in a burst of machine gun fire. The rest of the crew members decide not to sign on for another voyage on the Glencairn and go ashore, determined to help Ole return to his family in Sweden, whom he has not seen in ten years. 
At a seedy bar Ole is tricked into taking a drugged drink, and he is shanghaied aboard another ship, the Amindra. Driscoll and the rest of the crew rescue him from the ship, but Driscoll is accidentally left behind in the confusion. As the crew straggles back to the Glencairn the next morning to sign on for another voyage, they learn that the Amindra was sunk by German torpedoes, killing all on board.

==Cast==

==Production==

Independent film producer Walter Wanger made film-making history during the production of this film.  He hired nine prominent American artists, all painters, to document the dramatic scenes during the film's production.  Mr. Wanger offered a commission of over $50,000 to encourage the artists to participate, and these funds were secured with the help of Reeves Lowenthal, Director of the Associated American Artists.  No other undertaking of this magnitude and purpose had been done before in Hollywood film making.  The artists insisted on three things to ensure a quality effort: freedom of choice on subject matter, studios on the production lot and a projection room for viewing rushes.  The artists who participated were Thomas Benton, Grant Wood, George Biddle, James Chapin, Ernest Fiene, Robert Philipp, Luis Quintanilla, Raphael Soyer and Georges Schreiber. Eleven original paintings emerged from this inaugural effort.  These toured the country in the museum circuit of the day beginning with a display in the Associated American Artists Galleries on Fifth Avenue, New York.Cover article, American Artist Magazine, September, 1940, pp 4-14..The Long Voyage Home at The Ned Scott Archive, artist portraits and paintings.

==Critical reception==

Critic Bosley Crowther, film critic for The New York Times, liked the screenplay, the message of the film, and John Ford's direction, and wrote, "John Ford has truly fashioned a modern Odyssey—a stark and tough-fibered motion picture which tells with lean economy the never-ending story of man's wanderings over the waters of the world in search of peace for his soul...it is harsh and relentless and only briefly compassionate in its revelation of man's pathetic shortcomings. But it is one of the most honest pictures ever placed upon the screen; it gives a penetrating glimpse into the hearts of little men and, because it shows that out of human weakness there proceeds some nobility, it is far more gratifying than the fanciest hero-worshiping fare."Crowther, Bosley. The New York Times, film review, "The Long Voyage Home, Magnificent Drama of the Sea," October 9, 1940. Last accessed: January 18, 2008
The staff at Variety magazine wrote, "Combining dramatic content of four Eugene O'Neill one-act plays, John Ford pilots adventures of a tramp steamer from the West Indies to an American port, and then across the Atlantic with cargo of high explosives. Picture is typically Fordian, his direction accentuating characterizations and adventures of the voyage."Variety. Film review, October 9, 1940.  Last accessed: January 18, 2008.
Critic Dennis Schwartz appreciated the acting ensemble in the film and wrote, "The film was too stagebound to be effective cinema, but it scores points in its unsentimental portrait of the loser life of the lonely and desperate merchant seamen. These same misfits, who don't fit the image of heroes, nevertheless come through as men who do their duty when the chips are down and prove they will fight for their country even though it's not necessarily for patriotic reasons."Schwartz, Dennis. Ozus' World Movie Reviews, review, September 8, 2005. Last accessed: January 18, 2008.
The review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 100 percent of critics gave the film a positive review, based on five reviews.The Long Voyage Home at Rotten Tomatoes. Last accessed: December 2, 2009.

==Reception==

The film made a loss of $224,336.

==Awards==

Wins
Nominations

==References==

==External links==


