[[William Lithgow (judge)]]

CATEGORIES: People from County Londonderry, 1715 births, 1798 deaths, Kingdom of Ireland emigrants to the Thirteen Colonies, People of Massachusetts in the French and Indian War, People of Maine in the French and Indian War, Maine colonial people, Massachusetts colonial people, People of British North America, People of Maine in the American Revolution, People from Lincoln County, Maine, People of pre-statehood Maine, American judges

Hon. William Lithgow (c. 1715 – December 20, 1798) was a judge for the Court of Common Pleas of Lincoln County, when Maine was under the jurisdiction of the Province of Massachusetts Bay. Lithgow also served in the Massachusetts Bay Colonial Militia for twenty years before and during the French and Indian War.

==Biography==

William Lithgow’s family, emigrated from Derry, Ireland, to Boston on the ship "Olive", chartered by Robert Temple. William was just three years old when he and his family came to the Americas. From Boston, the Lithgows traveled north to present day Maine, at the mouth of the Kennebec River near Merrymeeting Bay, where William's father, Robert, prospected land in Topsham territory around 1720. However, due to incessant Indian attacks, the Lithgow family was forced to flee, seeking refuge at Fort George in Brunswick, about four miles distance.New York Genealogical and Biographical Society, 1898 p.1
Like his father, William joined the Massachusetts Bay Colonial Militia when he was about 19. He was attached to the garrison of Fort George, and then promoted to command Fort Richmond on the Kennebec. 
In 1746, Lithgow settled in Georgetown, where he married Sarah Noble, the daughter of Lt. Col. Arthur Noble, who fought to the death against the French Canadians at the Battle of Minas in Nova Scotia. 
In 1754, Lithgow was commission Colonel and was appointed by Gov. William Shirley to command the garrison at Fort Halifax,Mellon, 1963 p.16 established near the junction of the Sebasticook and Kennebec Rivers. After a few years, Lithgow became a justice of the peace and then appointed as a judge for the court of Common Pleas, in Lincoln County. He died December 20, 1798 and it was spoken of him that “he was a cultivated and courteous gentleman, as well as an energetic and faithful officer.” Bridge, 1884 p.79

==See also==

==Sources==

==References==


