[[Maxime Chanot]]

CATEGORIES: 1990 births, Living people, Association football defenders, French footballers, People from Nancy, France, AS Nancy players, Stade de Reims players, Sheffield United F.C. players, Mansfield Town F.C. players, Hamilton Academical F.C. players, Le Mans FC players, FC Gueugnon players, R. White Star Bruxelles players, Beerschot AC players, K.V. Kortrijk players, Belgian Second Division footballers, Belgian Pro League players, Luxembourg international footballers, Luxembourgian footballers

Maxime Chanot (born 21 January 1990, in Nancy, France) is a Luxembourgish-French footballer who plays as a defender for Kortrijk in the Belgian Pro League.

==Playing career==

Having joined Sheffield United in 2006 from Stade de Reims Chanot became a regular in the academy and reserves sides. The aggressive, athletic central defender joined Mansfield Town on loan on 4 October 2008, and made his debut for Mansfield in the 0-1 defeat against Woking despite picking up man of the match award.  He returned to Bramall Lane having played five games for The Stags. During December 2008 he went on loan to Scottish premier league side Hamilton academical.
As the Blades looked to cut costs having failed to gain promotion Chanot was released at the end of the 2008-09 season.
He went on trial in summer 2009 to championship side Barnsley and impressed the coaching staff  with his competitive style and played in five pre-season friendlies, Barnsley extended his trial period for a further two weeks after impressing in the games and training.Chanot narrowly missed out on a contract with Barnsley, due to them wanting a more experienced central defender, in November 2009 the talented youngster signed for French premier league side Le Mans FC for two years. He moved on a year's loan to FC Gueugnon in 2010. In September 2011 Chanot signed for Belgium team WS Woluwe. In July 2012, Chanot was awarded with a new one year contract with WS Woluwe.

==References==

==External links==


