A ''dahaheah'' was a large houseboat with triangular cross-sails. The rear of the boat sported a cabin, where the chartering party could sleep. Typically, they took their meals on the roof of the cabin under a large awning. This means of conveyance was typically used by English and other foreign tourists on the Nile in the nineteenth century. The crew consisted of a dozen or more men, who cooked, captained the vessel and shopped in the bazaars for supplies.</ref> and a crew of 13 Egyptians to take them down the [[Nile River]]. Architect Hunt, later famous for his [[Gilded Age]] Newport palazzos, painted and made sketches along the Nile while his younger brother and Baker took photographs. (The results were later shown at a 1999 exhibition in Washington, D.C.)
Following their arduous journey, the pair of no-longer-neophyte photographers returned to Paris and made prints from their 18x24 cm negatives which were made using a waxed-paper process.As pioneers of photography, it is unclear how Hunt and Baker learned so much so early. The Englishman William Fox Talbot was still perfecting his Calotype (sometimes called Talbotype) process at the time of the duo's journey. Indeed, it was the year 1852, while Hunt and Baker were embarked on their trip, that one of the early pioneers of Talbot's work, the English inventor, geologist and Royal Society member Levett Landon Boscawen Ibbetson showed his new book using the Talbot process at a London Society of Arts exhibition. Having developed the negatives, each man kept a personal album of the prints. The young Hunt showed his to the German naturalist and explorer Alexander von Humboldt, who brought them to the attention of the King of Prussia, and Hunt made a formal gift of 11 prints to Karl Richard Lepsius, the German founder of the study of ancient Egyptology.The Annals of Brattleboro, 1681–1905, Vol. II, Mary Rogers Cabot, E. L. Hildreth & Co., Brattleboro, 1922 Baker left his album with a New York dealer to discern commercial interest in the prints.
Following their extraordinary journey, the two men took divergent paths. Baker returned to Cincinnati, Ohio, to enjoy the life of a wealthy aesthete, while Hunt completed his studies at the Swiss Military Institute, then returned to America where he took a second law degree, this one from Harvard.Quinquennial Catalogue of the Law School of Harvard University, Harvard Law School, Harvard Law School Association (1817–1904), Published by the Law School, Cambridge, 1905 He began practicing law in New York City, the home of his brother Richard Morris Hunt, until the outbreak of the American Civil War, when he enlisted as lieutenant on the staff of General Heintzelman. Eventually he was promoted to lieutenant colonel for bravery at the Battle of Malvern Hill.Civil War to the Bloody End: The Life and Times of Major General Samuel P. Heintzelman, Jerry D. Thompson, Texas A & M University Press, 2006 Hunt subsequently attained the rank of full colonel and assistant adjutant general in the Union Army.The Civil War Defenses of Washington: Historic Resource Study, National Park Service
Following the Civil War, Leavitt Hunt returned to New York City and his law practice for several years, until he retired in 1867 to Weathersfield, Vermont, where his wife Katherine Jarvis The Life and Times of Hon. William Jarvis, Mary Pepperell Sparhawk Jarvis Cutts, Hurd and Houghton, New York, Riverside Press, Cambridge, 1869 had inherited the estate belonging to her father William Jarvis, a prominent Vermont businessman and diplomat best known as the first importer of Merino sheep into America.
Leavitt Hunt purchased his own estate at nearby Weathersfield Bow and became a gentleman farmer. Hunt was particularly interested in the rare breeds of Dutch cattle that he raised,Annual Report of the Vermont State Board of Agriculture, Manufactures and Mining for the Year 1872, Peter Collier, Secretary of the Board, Montpelier, 1872 as well as the white pine forests he propagated on his estate, which he dubbed Elmsholme.Leavitt and Katherine Hunt, 'Elmsholme,' Weathersfield, Vt., New York Social Register, Social Register Association, New York, 1897 During his retirement as a farmer, Hunt also became an inventor,United States Patent Office, Patent number 91445, Issued June 1869, Leavitt Hunt of Weathersfield, Vermot, Improvement in Plow with several patents for new plows.Annual Report of the Commissioner of Patents for the Year 1869, United States Patent Office, Vol. II, Government Printing Office, Washington, 1871Improvement in Sulky-Ploughs, Patent number 77617, May 5, 1868, United States Patent Office, Leavitt Hunt, Weathersfield, Vermont
As far as is known, neither Hunt nor his companion Baker ever showed much interest in the photographic medium after their journey. Their prints are rarely seen, very scarce, and are among the most valuable early photographic images. Hunt's personal album is now in the collection of the Bennington Art Museum, Bennington, Vermont. Baker's album evidently disappeared. The collection of photos presented to Egyptologist Richard Lepsius is housed at the Museum Ludwig's AgfaPhoto-Historama in Cologne, Germany. 
Hunt's personal negatives are believed lost, but the prints he made became the property of his brother Richard Morris Hunt. They are now preserved in the Richard Morris Hunt Papers at the American Architectural Foundation in Washington, D.C. A 1999 show at the American Architectural Foundation's Octagon Museum showcased Leavitt Hunt's 1853 journey. Entitled "A Voyage of Discovery: The Nile Journal of Richard Morris Hunt", the exhibition consisted of seventy of Leavitt Hunt's original photographic prints, as well as drawings and watercolors by Richard Morris Hunt from the museum's Prints and Drawings Collection.A Voyage of Discovery: The Nile Journal of Richard Morris Hunt, 1999, The Octagon Museum, The Museum of the American Architectural Foundation, archfoundation.org
Some of Leavitt Hunt's personal prints were donated by his family after his death to the Library of Congress, where they are part of the permanent photographic collection.Hunt's daughter Maud Hunt (Mrs. William E. Patterson) donated 26 Hunt prints to the Library of Congress in 1947, including views in Egypt, Greece, Jerusalem, and along the Nile River, including views of temples, tombs and ruins.http://memory.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/p?pp/ils:@FILREQ(@FIELD(CALL+@band(LOT%202388))+@FIELD(COLLID+coll))::SortBy=DOCID There are also a few original prints from this early Middle East trip in the Hallmark Photographic Collection and at the George Eastman House in Rochester, New York. Harvard University's Harrison D. Horblit Collection of Early Photography also owns several of the works by Hunt and Baker.
Although Leavitt Hunt never returned to photography, he remained vitally interested in the arts until the end of his life, corresponding with fellow Harvard-educated lawyer and author Henry Dwight Sedgwick, as well as other intellectuals of the era.Correspondence between Henry Dwight Sedgwick and Leavitt Hunt, Sedgwick Family Papers 1717–1946, Massachusetts Historical Society, masshist.org He and his wife travelled frequently, often crossing paths with family friends like Joseph Hodges Choate and Thomas Jefferson Coolidge.Autograph File, Houghton Library, Harvard College Library, Harvard University, lib.harvard.edu  He also wrote poetry on the side.Nature and Art: Poems and Pictures from the Best Authors and Artists, Louise Reid Estes, Estes and Lauriat, Boston, 1882
Perhaps the highest tribute paid Leavitt Hunt and his brothers was that of Ralph Waldo Emerson. "The remarkable families", Emerson wrote, were "the three Jackson brothers....the three Lowell brothers....the four Lawrences....the Cabots....the three Hunts, William, Richard and Leavitt (William Hunt tells also of his brother John, in Paris); the Washburns, three governors, I believe."[tpl]Cite book|url=http://books.google.com/books?id=qjMRAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA269|title=Journals of Ralph Waldo Emerson, 1864–1876|author=Ralph Waldo Emerson|editor=Edward Waldo Emerson and Waldo Emerson Forbes|publisher=Houghton Mifflin Company|location=Boston|year=1914|page=269[/tpl]
Clyde du Vernet Hunt, who graduated from Andover and Harvard Law School, and subsequently became a painter and sculptor accepted by the Paris Salon,The Phillipian, Phillips Andover Academy, Andover, Mass., April 24, 1897 was the son of Leavitt Hunt and his wife, the former Katherine Jarvis.The Lincoln Trilogy, Clyde Du Vernet Hunt, Bennington MuseumRarely Viewed Hunt Family Work on View at the Bennington Museum, benningtonmuseum.org A portrait of Leavitt Hunt painted by his brother William Morris Hunt in 1874 is in the permanent collection of the Brooks Memorial Library, Brattleboro's main library.Newspapers and magazines of the day carried news that Leavitt Hunt was writing a biography of his brother the painter, but this work never appeared. Apparently Leavitt Hunt's intentions were supplanted by the 1899 volume Life of William Morris Hunt, written by William Morris Hunt's longtime student Helen Mary Knowlton. http://books.google.com/books?id=jE0FAAAAQAAJ&pg=PA265&dq=%22leavitt+hunt%22+salem&ei=DZzsSLXEKoScswPputXqBg Artist William Morris Hunt sketched other members of his brother Leavitt's family as well.Exhibition of the Works of William Morris Hunt, Boston Museum of Fine Arts, Alfred Mudge & Son, Boston, 1880 Jarvis Hunt, another son of Col. Hunt and his wife, became a noted Chicago architect.Annals of Brattleboro, Volume II, Chapter LXIX
Leavitt Hunt's wife Katherine, daughter of businessman William Jarvis, died June 6, 1916, at Lakewood, New Jersey, and was interred with her husband at Weathersfield.Obituary, Katherine Jarvis Hunt, The New York Times, June 6, 1916, nytimes.com Leavitt Hunt predeceased his wife, dying at Weathersfield on February 16, 1907. The couple's infant son Morris Hunt, who died in 1871, is interred with his parents.Weathersfield Bow Cemetery, Weathersfield, Vermont

==See also==

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==














