[[Ministry of Health (Pakistan)]]

CATEGORIES: Government ministries of Pakistan, Health in Pakistan, Health ministries

The Ministry of Health of Pakistan is a government agency responsible for Pakistan's health system. The Ministry of Health was devolved to the provinces under the 18th Amendment, by the Federal Government, on June 30, 2011. http://www.pakistantoday.com.pk/2011/06/18/news/national/who-apprehensive-about-health-ministry%E2%80%99s-devolution/ However, it was re-installed by Prime Minister Khoso on the advice of Dr. Sania Nishtar, who became the Federal Minister in April 2013 was appointed as the focal person for Health, however, the Federal Minister for the Ministry of Health Services, Regulation and Coordination was Shahzada Jamal Nazir, who was also the Federal Minister for Religious Affairs, National Harmony and Natinal Heritage, the biggest portfolio in the cabinet. . http://www.thenews.com.pk/Todays-News-2-175715-PM-consolidates-health-functions-under-renamed-division Sania Nishtar, Devolving Health. (Notification No. 4-9/2011-Min.I)

==Description==

It is a branch of the Government, which is the department for provision of medical services, responsible to frame the health policies and to enforce the same at a national level. It is headed by the Health Minister of Pakistan on democratic level, while controlled by the Federal Secretary as well as the Director General Health of Pakistan on bureaucratic level.
Besides the federal health department, each of the four provinces of Pakistan has its respective health department and Secretariat, under the supervision of a health minister of that province, controlled by a Secretary, Additional Secretaries, Deputy Secretaries, and a Director General Health Services, assisted by Director and Deputy Directors. All stand responsible to control, manage, administer medical service matters to the citizenry of their jurisdiction and frame and enforce health policies in their respective provinces in line with that promulgated by the federal health department.
The Federal Health Department runs several health service projects on national level such as National Programme for Family Planning & Primary Health Care, Polio Eradication Program, Malaria Control Program, National Maternal, Neonatal and Child Health (MNCH) Program, Expanded Program on Immunization, National Program for Prevention and Control of Hepatitis, National Tuberculosis Control Program, through the provincial health departments. Besides being responsible to handle Civil Hospitals in major cities and Taluqa Hospitals in smaller towns, it also runs and supervises thousands of health facilities like Basic Health Units, Mother & Child Care Centres, T.B. Centres, First Aid Points, Urban Health Centres, Government Dispensaries and Rural Health Centres in rural areas of the provinces. A brief detail of the specific health projects is mentioned as under.
The Health Department also stands responsible to run the Medical Colleges and Medical Universities in whole of Pakistan.

==References==


