[[Calming the storm]]

CATEGORIES: Christian miracle narrative, Miracles attributed to Jesus

Calming the storm is one of the miracles of Jesus in the Gospels, namely in Mark 4:35-41, Luke 8:22-25 and Matthew 8:23-27.Biblegateway Mark 4:35-41 Biblegateway.comBiblegateway Luke 8:22-25 Biblegateway.comBiblegateway Matthew 8:23-27 Biblegateway.com This episode is distinct from Jesus' walk on water which also involves a boat on the lake and appears later in the narrative, in chapter 14 of Matthew.
According to the Gospels, one evening Jesus and his disciples were crossing the Sea of Galilee in a boat when a furious storm came up, with the waves breaking over the boat, so that it was nearly swamped. Jesus was in the stern, sleeping on a cushion, but the disciples woke him and said to him, "Teacher, don't you care if we drown?"The People's New Testament Commentary by M. Eugene Boring and Fred B. Craddock (Oct 1, 2004) ISBN 0664227546 page 126 The Gospel of Mark then states that:
 
 He got up, rebuked the wind and said to the waves, "Quiet! Be still!" Then the wind died down and it was completely calm. He said to his disciples, "Why are you so afraid? Do you still have no faith?" They were terrified and asked each other, "Who is this? Even the wind and the waves obey him!"Mark 4:39-41.

Author Michael Keene commented that the Sea of Galilee was known for its sudden and fierce storms and that the Jews were people of the land who were generally uncomfortable at sea, specially since they believed the sea to be full of frightening creatures.Michael Keene 2002 St Mark's Gospel and the Christian faith ISBN 0-7487-6775-4 page 26
Author John Clowes commented that by asking the question "Why are you so afraid?" Jesus was asking his disciples to explore in their own minds the cause and origin of fear, so they would realize that all fear has its roots in natural affection and thought, separate from spiritual affection and thought. And by asking "Do you still have no faith?" Jesus was manifestly pointing to a defect in their spiritual principles. 
Clowes further commented that by that last question Jesus was manifestly instructing his disciples, and through them all future generations of mankind, that fear is the constant result of the weakness of Heavenly principles in the human mind.John Clowes, 1817 The Miracles of Jesus Christ published by J. Gleave, Manchester, UK page 47

==See also==

==References==


