[[Eyedrum]]

CATEGORIES: Culture of Atlanta, Georgia, Music venues in Georgia (U.S. state), Arts organizations based in the United States

Eyedrum is a non-profit art space and venue in Atlanta, Georgia focused on contemporary art and experimental music ranging from contemporary chamber music, sound sculpture to drone noise music, and art rock. Up until Jan. 1, 2011, they were located in the Old Fourth Ward district, and had three art galleries and one space for music and performance. They hosted approximately 180 events yearly.article in The Atlanta Journal-Constitution Established in 1998, Eyedrum is one of the longest running is art and performance spaces in Atlanta run by volunteers.
Eyedrum often organizes events in collaboration with various community partners. Examples include the annual Listening Machines events with Georgia Institute of Technology, Henry W. Grady High School art department, The Film Love series of art films, Besides visual art exhibitions and performances it also hosts film, lecture events and other related activities. Monthly they have an improvisation night focused on the exploration of experimentation of music and sound. In the past it hosted the Table of the Elements Festival and the Rogue Independent Music Festival. Live performances from various acts such as Ken Lockie, Hubcap City, Bill Taft & Tunnels were recorded at Eyedrum and later on released as live albums.
Eyedrum's structure is unique, in that it is an all-volunteer organization with no paid staff. The board of directors is a working board, with members meeting monthly and handling virtually every aspect of running the space, from programming and promotions, to accounting and fundraising, to mopping the floors and taking out the trash.
Eyedrum has been hosting "Satellite" events (aka "Eyedrum Elsewhere" events) and various venues around Atlanta, including 364 Nelson Street SW, Atlanta, GA 30313 in Castleberry Hill, The Goat Farm, Beep Beep Gallery and The Music Room at Pizzeria Vesuvius. Eyedrum is currently located in C4's FUSE Arts Center.

==References==

==External links==


