[[Tim Crowther]]

CATEGORIES: BBC radio presenters, Living people, 1958 births, Alumni of Leeds College of Music

Tim Crowther (born Warley, near Halifax, 19 November 1958) has presented for BBC Radio Leeds since the late 1970s, whilst he was still a student at the City of Leeds College of Music. Since then, he has hosted variously breakfast, mid-morning, lunchtime, afternoon and drivetime programmes, as well as a range of daytime and weekend programmes.
Alongside his other career interests, Tim has partnered with popular horticulturist Joe Maiden for the past 15 years, and the two have developed a formula for a light hearted gardening programme (Tim and Joe, BBC Radio Leeds, Sunday 9am - noon). Their programme regular achieves peak audiences for the station across its weekly output. Recent innovations include a weekly podcast (Gardening with Tim and Joe), a collection of highlights from their weekly radio programme.

==Charity work==

Tim is always up for a laugh and a joke, especially when the result is in the aid of charity. 2009 was no different  in this respect when the call went out for  volunteers to perform  on stage  at what  had once been one of  England’s premier night spots in the 1960s and 1970s, The Batley Variety Club, now known as The Frontier. The club played host to some of the biggest names in show business during that era - names such as Shirley Bassey, Louis Armstrong, Tom Jones and Lulu. Even ol' blue eyes himself, crooner Frank Sinatra was reputed to have visited the club as a customer.
Not a man to be put off easily, Tim along with fellow radio broadcasters quickly answered the call to perform before a capacity audience in aid of Comic Relief. The show, Stars in Our Eyes, was produced in the form of a talent contest and sponsored by BBC Radio Leeds. Tim and co-presenter Joe Maiden performed as a duo impersonating Elton John and Kiki Dee singing ‘Don’t Go Breaking My Heart’. Their imaginative performance was acknowledged by being awarded the third place trophy, the production being a resounding success and with all receipts being donated to Comic Relief charities.

==Notes and references==


