[[American Magazine of Useful and Entertaining Knowledge]]

CATEGORIES: Publications established in 1834, Publications disestablished in 1837, Defunct magazines of the United States, 1830s in the United States, Media in Boston, Massachusetts, Magazines published in Massachusetts, 19th century in Boston, Massachusetts

The American Magazine of Useful and Entertaining Knowledge (1834–1837) was a monthly magazine based in Boston, Massachusetts. It was established by a group of engravers to "give to the public a work descriptive, not merely of subjects, scenes, places, and persons existing in distant climes, but also of those which are to be found in our own fine and native country."American Magazine, v.1, no.1; p.1. It featured profusely illustrated articles on many topics, including American animals, plants, natural scenery, colleges, banks, hospitals, churches, cities, technology, and so on; as well as biographical articles on figureheads of the revolutionary and federal eras. Modelled after the British Penny Magazine, it was published first by the Boston Bewick Company, then by William D. Ticknor and John L. Sibley."Several of the gentlemen interested in the magazine, are themselves engravers, and it may be said without vanity, that they have contributed in no small degree to bring that beautiful, though long neglected art, to the high point of perfection which it has attained in this country." American Magazine, v.1, no.1; p.1.The Boston Bewick Co. was affiliated with Abel Bowen;  George W. Boynton;  Lewis H. Bridgham;  Daniel H. Craig;  William Croome;  John C. Crossman;  George A. Curtis;  Nicholas B. Devereux, Jr.;  John Downes;  John H. Hall;  Alonzo Hartwell;  Freeman Hunt, and Richard P. Mallory. The firm kept offices on Court Street in Boston. Cf. American Magazine, v.1, 1834.William James Linton. The history of wood-engraving in America. Boston: Estes and Lauriat, 1882. In 1836 Nathaniel Hawthorne served as editor.Brenda Wineapple. Hawthorne: a life. Random House, 2004; p.87-89.Joseph R. Modugno. Introduction to "The Duston Family." Hawthorne in Salem. Retrieved 6 January 2010.

==References==

==Images==

Image:1834 buffalo AmericanMagazine v1 Boston.png|Illustration of a bison from American Magazine, 1834
Image:1834 Bagdad1 AmericanMagazine v1 Boston.png|Baghdad, from American Magazine 1834
Image:1835 clouds AmericanMagazine v1 Boston.png|Clouds, from American Magazine 1835

==Further reading==

==External links==


