[[Keaton Simons]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American performance artists, 1978 births

Keaton Simons (born 20 July 1978) is a Los Angeles recording and performing artist.  He is signed to Best Revenge Records, his independent label created in 2012. Keaton's music has been featured on shows such as "Sons of Anarchy," "Hollywood Heights," "Private Practice," NCIS: Los Angeles, Crash, American Dad!, Harper's Island, and The Cleaner to name a few.
In the Spring of 2013, Keaton released his sophomore full-length album "Beautiful Pain," on Best Revenge Records. The album was co-produced with Mikal Blue (Colbie Caillat, One Republic) and mastered by Gavin Lurssen of Lurssen Mastering. It also includes co-writes with friends and peers Jason Mraz, Jason Reeves, Glen Phillips (Toad The Wet Sprocket) and Mikal Blue among others. With the exception of the drums, which are played by the United Nations’ Musical Director, Robin DiMaggio (Paul Simon, David Bowie, "Lopez Tonight"), all instruments on "Beautiful Pain" are played by Keaton. Additional featured artists on the record include Alex Al (bass), Lenny Castro (percussion), Zac Rae (keys), Tyler Hilton (piano, vocals), and Tower of Power’s Bill Churchville (trumpet, trombone) and Sean Hill (saxophone).
A regular in The Hotel Café singer/songwriter circuit, Keaton Simons has been recognized by Examiner.com as achieving “cult-like” status in his hometown of Los Angeles, CA. But as most know, Keaton is far from being just  an ”L.A. guy”  let alone a “new artist” on the mainstream map. His debut EP "Currently" was released on Maverick Records in 2004 and his debut full-length album "Can You Hear Me" was released on CBS Records in 2008. Since then, he has toured nationally and internationally, opening for Coldplay, Train, Guster and REO Speedwagon amongst others. He has also worked as a writer, musical director, singer, bassist and guitarist with such notable acts as Gnarls Barkley, Snoop Dogg, Josh Kelley and Tre Hardson (The Pharcyde.)
In 2011 Keaton appeared on VH1’s "Celebrity Rehab with Dr. Drew" alongside stepfather, actor Eric Roberts, who was a patient. A performance of his song “Unstoppable” on the show resulted in over 10,000 iTunes downloads in only two days.
Keaton's multifaceted talents are not just in music, they have landed him appearances on television and film.  He has made guest appearances on shows such as The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson, Malcolm in the Middle, and American Dreams.  Keaton also appeared in the feature film Hollywood Dreams. He will make a cameo in the 2013 season finale of Showtimes's "Californication," on screen with David Duchovny and Maggie Grace.
Keaton currently lives in Venice Beach, CA with his girlfriend Laura Goldfarb, who is the owner of music public relations firm Red Boot PR as well as a DJ for the Internet station BreakThru Radio. Simons cites Goldfarb as the inspiration for his song and album title "Beautiful Pain," after they met each other at a music festival in upstate New York in 2009.
http://www.keatonsimons.com
http://washingtonexaminer.com/keaton-simons-shows-off-beautiful-pain/article/2530862

==References==


