[[American Turkish Chamber of Commerce]]

CATEGORIES: Chambers of commerce in the United States, Cherry Hill, New Jersey, Turkey–United States relations, Turkish organizations and associations in the United States

The American Turkish Chamber of Commerce (ATCOM) is a non-profit business organization, which was officially established on March 11, 2008 and headquartered at the prestigious Caplen Building in Cherry Hill, New Jersey. This initiative is an alliance of around 200 small to medium size Turkish and American firms operating mainly in the Mid-Atlantic region of the United States and its vicinities. 
ATCOM members operate in various sectors of the economy such as: retail and wholesale food, banking, aviation, construction, transportation, furniture, real estate, insurance, law, and healthcare. ATCOM embraces all kinds of emerging and dynamic professionals, entrepreneurs, and small to medium size corporations throughout the United States. It also hosts a number of global members from Turkey to Germany.

==Mission==

The mission of ATCOM is to try to promote the economic, social and cultural interests of its members, affiliates and surrounding communities.

==Purpose==

The main purpose of ATCOM is to promote networking, training, and collaborative efforts among its members and affiliates. It also seeks to create an environment where businesses and their surrounding communities can grow together. ATCOM intends to increase the awareness of its members, support their growth prospects, empower them with professional guidance, and help them reap important savings by negotiating with third parties and trading with each other.
ATCOM also aims to promote trade between firms in Turkey, Europe, and the USA. For this purpose it has established close ties with leading business organizations in Turkey, such as MÜSİAD, TOBB, DEIK, TAIK, ITO, among others.  ATCOM is the American partner and representative of the Independent Industrialists and Businessmen Association (MUSIAD) in Turkey. MÜSİAD is one of the largest business associations in Turkey, with about 3,100 members, 1,600 young members, 15,000 companies and 31 branch-offices all over Turkey as well as focal points in over 40 countries.   TCOM also serves as the board member for the Americas region (North America, South America and Caribbean) of the World Turkish Business Council, an initiative of the Union of Chambers and Commodity Exchanges of Turkey (TOBB). With over 1.3 million members, TOBB is the largest business association in the world. With these duties and representations, ATCOM serves as a bridge between Turkish entrepreneurs and U.S. businesses to aid them in developing new relationships.
ATCOM is also a strong regional partner for the Turkish American business establishments in America. The founders of ATCOM believe that businesses can collaborate with one another to build a strong and successful future.

==Vision==

The vision of ATCOM is to aspire to a just and peaceful social environment where businesses and communities can flourish together.

==Objectives==

ATCOM is organized to accomplish its mission and realize its vision through 3 main objectives:

==External links==


