[[Massachusetts Library System]]

CATEGORIES: 2010 establishments in Massachusetts, Libraries in Massachusetts, Organizations based in Massachusetts, Library-related organizations

The Massachusetts Library System (est.2010) is "a state-supported collaborative" in Massachusetts with a mission to "foster ... cooperation, communication, innovation, and sharing among member libraries of all types"MLS website. Retrieved 2010-12-29 and "to provide regional services to libraries and residents."Massachusetts Library System. Membership Agreement. Massachusetts Board of Library Commissioners website. Retrieved 2010-12-29Specifically, "the purpose of the Massachusetts Library System is to provide supplementary library services to the cities and towns in the region in accordance with M.G.L. 78, section 19 and regulations and administrative guidelines of the Board of Library Commissioners.  Services to be provided by the Massachusetts Library System are specified by the Board of Library Commissioners." cf. Massachusetts Library System. Membership Agreement. Retrieved 2010-12-29 Members may include "public, academic, school and special" libraries.Massachusetts Library System. Certification of membership eligibility. MLS website. Retrieved 2010-12-29 The system provides the following core services: advising, BiblioTemps(Registered Trademark), training & professional development, cooperative purchasing, research & development, summer library program, and the following services as part of resource sharing: delivery, mediated interlibrary loan, journal article document delivery, MassCat http://www.masscat.org, and online content."MLS Strategic Plan 2013-2015. http://www.masslibsystem.org/wp-content/uploads/2012-10-22-Strategic-Plan-FINAL-VERSION.pdf. Retrieved 2014-02-25  It operates from offices in Marlborough and Whately, Massachusetts.
The entity was formed "to consolidate the services of six former regional library systems:"MLS website. Retrieved 2010-12-29 Boston Regional Library System, Central Massachusetts Regional Library System, MetroWest Regional Library System, Northeast Massachusetts Regional Library System, Southeastern Massachusetts Library System, and Western Massachusetts Regional Library System."Why Regional Library Systems Matter." Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Board of Library Commissioners. 2009 Annual Report During its formation by the Massachusetts legislature in spring 2010, the state-wide system received mixed support. The Massachusetts Library Association, for example, opposed aspects of the consolidation of regional systems, claiming service would suffer.Action Alert: House Budget Has Bad News for Libraries; MLA Opposes Amendments, Asks for Senate Help. Massachusetts Library Association website. Retrieved 2010-12-29
According to its website, the Massachusetts Library System's "services are provided through state funds administered by the Massachusetts Board of Library Commissioners," a state agency. As of December 2010, the executive board consists of representatives from public libraries, public and private schools and colleges, and libraries of private organizations. 

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==


