[[Robert W. Edmondson]]

CATEGORIES: American bishops, Bishops of independent Catholic Churches, Living people, Norwich University alumni

Robert Walter Edmondson is the second Metropolitan Archbishop of the Anglo-Lutheran Catholic Church (ALCC).  
Edmondson was elected Metropolitan Archbishop by the Holy Synod of the ALCC on December 12, 2011, and replaces the founder and first Metropolitan Archbishop, Irl A. Gladfelter.Anglo-Lutheran Catholic Church - International HeadquartersArchbishop Robert W. M. Edmondson, CSP. The Anglo-Lutheran Catholic Church, 2011. Retrieved 15 September 2011. Prior to his election he served as the ALCC's Vicar general (Chief of Staff in the Office of the Metropolitan Archbishop) Director, Office for the Promotion of Christian Unity, Archbishop of the ALCC's Archdiocese for the Military Services and Veteran’s Affairs;Anglo-Lutheran Catholic Church - International Headquarters Secretary General of the Augustana Catholic Communion, and Archbishop Ordinary, Archdiocese of Pittsburgh-Ohio Valley.Archdiocese of Pittsburg and the Ohio Valley - Biographical page for Archbishop EdmondsonArchdiocese of Pittsburg and the Ohio Valley - homepage- Anglo-Lutheran Catholic Church - Admin/Diocesan Offices  He is a life-professed Augustinian priest in the ALCC's Priestly Society of Saint AugustineSocietas Sacerdotalis Sancti Augustini (Priestly Society of Saint Augustine) and Chairman of the Board of Governors of St. Ambrose College, Catholic Theological Consortium.Catholic Theological Consortium Faculty and Staff
Edmondson is a graduate of Norwich University (the Military College of Vermont), Bloomfield College, Drew University (theological school), and Louisville Presbyterian Theological Seminary; holding the degrees of Bachelor of Arts (B.A.), Master of Divinity (M.Div.), Master of Sacred Theology (S.T.M.), Doctor of Ministry (D.Min.), and Doctor of Theology (Th.D.)  He also has received the honorary degrees of Doctor of Divinity and Doctor of Humane Letters. 
Edmondson has had a long and distinguished career in the United States Army. He was commissioned a Second Lieutenant, US Army Corps of Engineers, in 1968; was the Aide de Camp to the Commanding General of the US Army Corps of Engineers from 1968 to 1970; and was appointed to the US Army Chaplain Corps as a chaplain in 1975.  As an army chaplain, he was Unit Chaplain of the Year in 1985.  He served as Staff Chaplain with the 82nd Airborne Division, XVIII Airborne Corps, served as a staff officer, Headquarters, U.S. Army Reserve Officers Corps, and at NATO Headquarters. Edmondson served as an Exchange Officer to the West German Defense Ministry and the Royal Belgium Army.  He has served in the Department of the U.S. Army General Staff, in the United States Department of Defense, and served as a Military Advisor to the President of the United States.  Edmondson was promoted to the rank of Brigadier General in 1997 and is now a Lieutenant General, Corps of Engineers, USAR.Archdiocese of Pittsburg and the Ohio Valley - Biographical Page for Archbishop Ednomdson

==References==


