[[Ideal gas]]

CATEGORIES: Ideal gas

An ideal gas is a theoretical gas composed   of a set of randomly moving, non-interacting point particles.  The ideal gas concept is useful because it obeys the ideal gas law, a simplified equation of state, and is amenable to analysis under statistical mechanics. One mole of an ideal gas has a volume of 22.41 L at STP.
At normal conditions such as standard temperature and pressure, most real gases behave qualitatively like an ideal gas. Many gases such as nitrogen, oxygen, hydrogen, noble gases, and some heavier gases like carbon dioxide can be treated like ideal gases within reasonable tolerances.[tpl]Cite book|title=Thermodynamics: An Engineering Approach |edition=Fourth | isbn = 0-07-238332-1|last1=Cengel|first1= Yunus A.|last2=Boles|first2=Michael A.|page=89[/tpl] Generally, a gas behaves more like an ideal gas at higher temperature and lower pressure, as the work which is against intermolecular forces becomes less significant compared with the particles' kinetic energy, and the size of the molecules becomes less significant compared to the empty space between them.
The ideal gas model tends to fail at lower temperatures or higher pressures, when intermolecular forces and molecular size become important.  It also fails for most heavy gases, such as many refrigerants, and for gases with strong intermolecular forces, notably water vapor. At low pressures, the volume of a real gas is often considerably greater than that of an ideal gas. At low temperatures, the pressure of a real gas is often considerably less than that of an ideal gas. At some point of low temperature and high pressure, real gases undergo a phase transition, such as to a liquid or a solid. The model of an ideal gas, however, does not describe or allow phase transitions.  These must be modeled by more complex equations of state.
The ideal gas model has been explored in both the Newtonian dynamics (as in "kinetic theory") and in quantum mechanics (as a "gas in a box"). The ideal gas model has also been used to model the behavior of electrons in a metal (in the Drude model and the free electron model), and it is one of the most important models in statistical mechanics.

==Types of ideal gas==

There are three basic classes of ideal gas:
The classical ideal gas can be separated into two types: The classical thermodynamic ideal gas and the ideal quantum Boltzmann gas. Both are essentially the same, except that the classical thermodynamic ideal gas is based on classical statistical mechanics, and certain thermodynamic parameters such as the entropy are only specified to within an undetermined additive constant. The ideal quantum Boltzmann gas overcomes this limitation by taking the limit of the quantum Bose gas and quantum Fermi gas in the limit of high temperature to specify these additive constants. The behavior of a quantum Boltzmann gas is the same as that of a classical ideal gas except for the specification of these constants. The results of the quantum Boltzmann gas are used in a number of cases including the Sackur–Tetrode equation for the entropy of an ideal gas and the Saha ionization equation for a weakly ionized plasma.

==Classical thermodynamic ideal gas==

The classical thermodynamic properties of an ideal gas can be described by two equations of state:.Adkins, C.J. (1968/1983). Equilibrium Thermodynamics, (1st edition 1968), third edition 1983, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK, ISBN 0-521-25445-0, pp. 116–120.Tschoegl, N.W. (2000). Fundamentals of Equilibrium and Steady-State Thermodynamics, Elsevier, Amsterdam, ISBN 0-444-50426-5, p 88.
One of them is the well known ideal gas law
that is, 
The other equation of state of an ideal gas must express Joule's law, that the internal energy of a fixed mass of ideal gas is a function only of its temperature. For the present purposes it is convenient to postulate an exemplary version of this law by writing:
where
In order to switch from macroscopic quantities (left hand side of the following equation) to microscopic ones (right hand side), we use
where
The probability distribution of particles by velocity or energy is given by the Maxwell speed distribution.
The ideal gas law is an extension of experimentally discovered gas laws. Real fluids at low density and high temperature approximate the behavior of a classical ideal gas. However, at lower temperatures or a higher density, a real fluid deviates strongly from the behavior of an ideal gas, particularly as it condenses from a gas into a liquid or as it deposits from a gas into a solid.  This deviation is expressed as a compressibility factor.
The ideal gas model depends on the following assumptions:
The assumption of spherical particles is necessary so that there are no rotational modes allowed, unlike in a diatomic gas. The following three assumptions are very related: molecules are hard, collisions are elastic, and there are no inter-molecular forces. The assumption that the space between particles is much larger than the particles themselves is of paramount importance, and explains why the ideal gas approximation fails at high pressures.

==Heat capacity==

The heat capacity at constant volume, including an ideal gas is:
The heat capacity at constant pressure of 1/R mole of ideal gas is:
The ratio of the constant volume and constant pressure heat capacity is 
Which for air which is a mixture it is 1.4.

==Entropy==

Using the results of thermodynamics only, we can go a long way in determining the expression for the entropy of an ideal gas. This is an important step since, according to the theory of thermodynamic potentials, if we can express the entropy as a function of U (U is a thermodynamic potential), volume V and the number of particles N, then we will have a complete statement of the thermodynamic behavior of the ideal gas. We will be able to derive both the ideal gas law and the expression for internal energy from it.
where the reference variables may be functions of the number of particles N. Using the definition of the heat capacity at constant volume for the first differential and the appropriate Maxwell relation for the second we have:
which implies that the entropy may be expressed as:
From this we find an equation for the function f(N)
Differentiating this with respect to a, setting a equal to unity, and then solving the differential equation yields f(N):
and using the expression for the internal energy of an ideal gas, the entropy may be written:
Since this is an expression for entropy in terms of U, V, and N, it is a fundamental equation from which all other properties of the ideal gas may be derived.

==Thermodynamic potentials==

Expressing the entropy as a function of T, V, and N:
The chemical potential of the ideal gas is calculated from the corresponding equation of state (see thermodynamic potential):
The thermodynamic potentials for an ideal gas can now be written as functions of T, V, and N as:
|-
|
|-
|-
|-
|}
In statistical mechanics, the relationship between the Helmholtz free energy and the partition function is fundamental, and is used to calculate the thermodynamic properties of matter; see configuration integral for more details.

==Speed of sound==

The speed of sound in an ideal gas is given by
where

==Table of ideal gas equations==

See Table of thermodynamic equations: Ideal	 gas.

==Ideal quantum gases==

In the above-mentioned Sackur–Tetrode equation, the best choice of the entropy constant was found to be proportional to the quantum thermal wavelength of a particle, and the point at which the argument of the logarithm becomes zero is roughly equal to the  point at which the average distance between particles becomes equal to the thermal wavelength. In fact, quantum theory itself predicts the same thing. Any gas behaves as an ideal gas at high enough temperature and low enough density, but at the point where the Sackur–Tetrode equation begins to break down, the gas will begin to behave as a quantum gas, composed of either bosons or fermions. (See the gas in a box article for a derivation of the ideal quantum gases, including the ideal Boltzmann gas.)
Gases tend to behave as an ideal gas over a wider range of pressures when the temperature reaches the Boyle temperature.

===Ideal Boltzmann gas===

The ideal Boltzmann gas yields the same results as the classical thermodynamic gas, but makes the following identification for the undetermined constant Φ:
where Λ is the thermal de Broglie wavelength of the gas and g is the degeneracy of states.

===Ideal Bose and Fermi gases===

An ideal gas of bosons (e.g. a photon gas) will be governed by Bose–Einstein statistics and the distribution of energy will be in the form of a Bose–Einstein distribution. An ideal gas of fermions will be governed by Fermi–Dirac statistics and the distribution of energy will be in the form of a Fermi–Dirac distribution.

==See also==

==References==


