[[St. Mary's Church (Poughkeepsie, New York)]]

CATEGORIES: Religious organizations established in 1873, Roman Catholic churches in New York, Churches in Poughkeepsie, New York

The Church of St. Mary is a Roman Catholic parish church under the authority of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, located in Poughkeepsie, Dutchess County, New York City. It was established as a parish in 1873.Remigius Lafort, S.T.D., Censor, The Catholic Church in the United States of America: Undertaken to Celebrate the Golden Jubilee of His Holiness, Pope Pius X. Volume 3: The Province of Baltimore and the Province of New York, Section 1: Comprising the Archdiocese of New York and the Diocese of Brooklyn, Buffalo and Ogdensburg Together with some Supplementary Articles on Religious Communities of Women.. (New York City: The Catholic Editing Company, 1914), p.427.

==History==

The congregation was organized in 1873 when the Rev. Patrick McSweeney, D.D., pastor of St. Peter's, Poughkeepsie purchased a former Universalist church building on Cannon St. The church was dedicated on July 20, 1873 by Cardinal McCloskey. 
On May 18, 1886, Rev. Terence J. Earley was appointed pastor of St. Mary's. During his pastorate, John McCann, a feed and grain dealer and a founding member of the parish, deeded his property on South Hamilton Street to St. Mary's, and a Gothic-style church built there was dedicated in 1893.Burger, John, "It's a Family, Catholic New York November 13, 1998 A stone which had been removed from Poughkeepsie Bridge, Pier No.2 served as cornerstone, presented by The Bridge Committee.Hasbrouck, Frank, ed. The History of Dutchess County New York, S.A. Mathieu, Poughkeepsie, NY 1909 The new church was built and dedicated on October 22, 1893.
The church was destroyed by fire in 1968. Msgr. Matthew J. Cox, pastor of St. Mary's from 1970 to 1982, guided the parish through the four-and-a-half-year process of rebuilding. James McCann, whose father had given the land for the church, died a year after the fire. Before his death, the younger McCann, who had been successful in the stock market, set up a philanthropic foundation. One of its first donations was $330,000 for the new church, which was more than matched by parish donations.
John J. Gartland, an attorney and president of the foundation, salvaged the baptismal font, the only item from the old church still in use. He and his wife also donated a 34-foot-high mosaic of Christ Triumphant that serves as a backdrop to the altar. Incorporated into the mosaic design are the original church and the Mid-Hudson Bridge, which parishioners see as a symbol of their call to build bridges with others and spread the faith.  The work was designed by American artist Lumen Martin Winter, who also sculpted the marble statue in front of the church depicting Mary holding the Christ Child above her head.

==References==

==External links==


