[[Gregorio Nardi]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, Italian musicologists, Italian pianists, Living people, People from Florence

Gregorio Nardi (born February 3, 1964 in Florence) is an Italian pianist and musicologist.

==Biography==

Gregorio Nardi was born into a family of musicians and writers. He lives and works in the studio in Florence, who belonged to his maternal grandfather Piero Bargellini, mayor of the town in 1966-67, which became Casa della Memoria (Memorial House), and it is open for the public as a Museum.Associazione Nazionale Case della Memoria
Until 1987 he studied piano with his paternal grandparents, Rio Nardi and Gregoria Gobbi (a celebrated piano duo trained at the schools of Giuseppe Buonamici, Ernesto Consolo, Ferruccio Busoni); and, since 1980, with Wilhelm Kempff of whom he was the last pupil.
After the first successes at the international Artur Rubinstein Competition in Tel Aviv (1983)Arthur Rubinstein International Music Society and Liszt Competition in Utrecht (1986),Internationaal Franz Liszt Pianoconcours his concerts – broadcast on the radio and television and on the internet – took him to perform in four continents. He collaborated with singers (Suzanne Danco, Marianne Pousseur, Elena Zaremba, Roberto Abbondanza, Mark Padmore, Leonardo Wolovsky), with dancers and actors (Carla Fracci, Vladimir Vassiliev, Italo Dall’Orto, Lina Sastri, Ferruccio Soleri), violinists (Ilya Grubert, Günter Pichler, Tamsin Waley-Cohen, Renato Zanettovich), flautists (Michele Marasco), percussionists (Jonathan Faralli).
He performed with the  Jerusalem Symphony Orchestra, Orchestra Sinfonica of Sanremo, Nederlands Philarmonisch Orkest, Noordelijk Filarmonisch Orkest, Het Gelders Orkest, Frysk Orkest, Limburgs Symphonie Orkest, OSS, Orchestre de la RTL, Deutsche Kammerakademie Neuss, Brandenburger Symphoniker, Leeds Youth Symphony Orchestra, Orchestre de Saintes, Orchestra Academia Szczecin, National Academic Orchestra of Bucarest. He also developed his style in playing on ancient instruments, and was invited in France and in Italy by Philippe Herreweghe.
His first Lisztian recording – Réminiscences des Puritains – was chosen by J. Methuen-Campbell (Gramophone, 1990) among the best releases of the year.Gramophone, December 1990 Since 1997 Nardi has realized under the Phoenix label two other Lisztian CDs – Composizioni Religiose; Vom Tode – and the first world recordings of unreleased compositions by the young Robert Schumann, by Ferdinand Hummel, by Arnold Schönberg, by Italian authors of the nineteenth century.Vocal Images, Aloma Bardi: Crossroads
As a critic, he began his activity writing for the magazine CD Classica and for many years has written reviews and articles for the monthly magazine Musica, on topics of music history and historic piano interpretation, and about Jewish composers (also The Orel FoundationThe Orel Foundation, Gregorio Nardi: The "Aryanization" of Italian Musical Life http://orelfoundation.org/index.php/journal/journalArticle/the_147aryanization148_of_italian_musical_life/)). He taught master classes and university lectures, in Italy and Israel; lessons about Busoni and his pupils (Ecole Normale Supérieure de Musique, Paris 1994), on Schumann and the Romanticism (Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa 2000 e 2001); lectures-recitals about Alberto Savinio (Düsseldorf International Conference, 2001; Lenbachhaus, Munich 2002; Kunstmuseum Winterthur, 2008), about Arnold Böcklin (Basel International Symposium, 2001), about Charles Ives (Syracuse University, Firenze 2004; Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris 2005), about Brahmsian interpretation (Université Paris8, 2004).
Since 1994, for more than ten years, he was the artistic director of the Musical Society of Santa Cecilia in Crevole (Siena). He collaborates, since the foundation, with ICAMus (The International Center for American Music)ICAMus - The International Center for American Music for the promotion and diffusion of the American classical music. He is cofounder and artistic director of the FLAMEnsemble – a group of 22 soloists for contemporary music – and of the Florence Chamber Music Festival,Flamensemble who presented monographic concerts dedicated to Elliott Carter, Klaus Huber, George Crumb, Salvatore Sciarrino, Henri Pousseur, György Kurtág, György Ligeti, John Cage; and other events, with the participation among others of Klaus Huber e Younghi Pagh-Paan, Ursula e Heinz Holliger, Marianne Pousseur, Salvatore Sciarrino.

==Repertoire==

Research of unpublished and unknown compositions has an important place in Nardi’s work.  A great success was obtained by his wide panoramas on the music of Jewish composers on the two last century, and the programmes dedicated to composers of the early Romanticism (Charles-Valentin Alkan, Juan Crisóstomo Arriaga, Ignaz Moscheles, George Pinto, Jan Václav Voříšek, Carl Maria von Weber …). Nardi was the first interpreter of many masterpieces: the first version of the Concord Sonata by Charles Ives,Solitudini Creative, June 17 2004 2 canons and a Klavierstück (Frei nach Schumann) by Johannes Brahms, 12 piano pieces by Hans Rott,Internationale Hans Rott Gesellschaft Wien 3 Etudes and 3 Preludes and Fugues by Busoni, 17 Fragmente by Schönberg, unreleased works by Alberto Savinio, 2 Intermezzi from the Ulisse by Luigi Dallapiccola transcribed by Franco Donatoni.
In 2003, he performed for the first time the complete 18 songs of the Song-Book  by George Gershwin, in the two versions with and without voice, reconstructed by  Nardi through original evidences and records made by Gershwin himself. Many contemporary authors has written especially for Nardi, among them Luciano Berio, Henri Pousseur, Roman Vlad, Gwyn Pritchard, Andrea Cavallari.
Fundamental were his researches on the unpublished compositions of the young Schumann. According to the original manuscripts, Nardi played for the very first time as a world premiere the Fantaisies et Finale, Variations Pathétiques, Variationen über ein Thema von Ignaz Ferdinand Freiherr von Fricken, 6 unpublished variations on a theme by Beethoven, Variation zum Preziosamarsch (Weber), Variationen zum Glöckchenthema (Paganini), Sehnsuchtswalzervariationen (Schubert), 6 Fugues, 5 Canons, 6 Waltzes, 5 Papillotten, 2 Burle, Je ne suis q’un songe, Scènes Mignonnes, Capriccio, Ecossaise, Notturnino, Ballo, Burla, Fantaisie sovra un tema di quattro note; and the first unpublished versions of Quasi Variazioni, Sonata in sol minore, Papillons, Variations on the name "Abegg", Phantasiestücke op. 111.

==Recordings==

Ferenc Liszt: Réminiscences des Puritains, first recording, and other rare piano works Dynamic Cat. CDS058 - Réminiscences des Puritains; Phantasie und Fuge über das Thema BACH; Variationen über das Thema Weinen, Klagen, Sorgen, Zagen; Berceuse.
Ferenc Liszt: le composizioni religiose per pianoforte 1 PH 97312 Invocation; Litanei; Variationen über das Thema Weinen, Klagen; Osterhymne; Via Crucis.
Robert Schumann: Fantaisies et Finales PH 98401 Fantaisies et Finale; Quasi Variazioni (first version); Impromptus op. 5 (first version).
Arnold Schönberg: 17 frammenti – Anton Webern: 5 composizioni PH 99505 Schönberg: 3 Klavierstücke, 17 Fragmente. Webern: Satz, Sonatensatz, Kinderstück, Klavierstück, Variationen op. 27.
Robert Schumann: Variations Pathétiques PH 99522 Variationen über ein Thema von Beethoven; Variations sur un Notturno de Chopin; Variationen zum Preziosamarsch (Weber); Variations Pathétiques; Variationen zum Glökchenthema (Paganini); Sehnsuchtswalzervariationen (Schubert); Sonata op. 22.
Franz Liszt: Vom Tode PH 99521, commissioned by the Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf Erlkönig; Vom Tode; Funérailles; Chasse-Neige; Sunt Lacrymae rerum; Aux Cypres de la Villa d’Este I; Csárdás macabre; La lugubre Gondola I e II; Hungarian Rhapsody n. 17; Trauervorspiel und Trauermarsch.
Löffelholz-Lieder 00616, with the Bariton Leonardo Wolovsky Lupi: Cinque canti trovadorici; Castelnuovo-Tedesco: Three sephardic songs; G. Nardi: Löffelholz-Lieder; Ibert: Chansons de Don Quichotte; Berg: Nun ich der Riesen; P. R. Nardi: Due melodie; Ives: Ich grolle nicht; Zangelmi: Die Brücke; Schönberg: Abschied.
Robert Schumann: Papillotten 05001 Schumann: 6 Walzer; Papillons Musicals; 5 Canons; 2 Burle; unveröffentlichte Papillons; 5 Papillotten; Je ne suis q’un songe; Intermezzi op. 4; Papillons n. 2. Brahms: Frei nach Schumann; Papillon; Kreis-Kanon; Kanon.

==External links==

Chopin: Etude op. 25 n. 5 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YSKWqsPIEeY
Chopin: Deux Nocturnes op. 48 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bnLaZveRzn0
Chopin-Liszt: Wiosna http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zi9Q3KHViW4
Liszt: Fantasie und Fuge ûber B.A.C.H. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k8sO61nzKd8
Liszt: Chasse-neige http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jl2Uio1JXRg
Liszt: Berceuse http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qo6eWtWCl6A
Schumann: Variations Pathétiques (excerpts) http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NGU1sn-p0TU
Kurtág: Játékok / Schumann: 4 unpublished compositions http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pfmuBVOD8E4
Busoni: Turandots Frauengemach; Die Nâchtlichen http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K32JVMeB6Tg
Klaus Huber: Ein Hauch von Unzeit II http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ugh61TPZt_E
George Crumb: Processional http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jAuPDPFaeRA

==References==


