[[Topcon RE Super]]

CATEGORIES: 135 film cameras, SLR cameras

The Topcon RE Super, or Beseler Topcon Super D in USA, was launched by Tokyo Kogaku KK in 1963 and manufactured until 1971, at which point it was upgraded to the Super D and again to Super DM the following year. General sale continued for several years. These later models have a shutter release lock lever on the shutter release collar. It is a professional oriented 35mm SLR camera that had a comprehensive range of accessories available. It has a removable pentaprism finder and focusing screen. It features the Exakta bayonet lens mount for interchangeable lenses. A special accessory shoe is situated at the base of the rewind knob with a standard PC sync. contact next to it. The release button is placed at the right-hand camera front, but it lacks a mirror-up facility. This was included on the upgraded versions. The standard lens is the RE. Auto-Topcor 1:1.4 f=5.8cm or the slightly slower 1:1.8 version. A battery-operated winder to be attached to the camera base was made available.
Some common features of 35mm SLR photography were first seen on the Topcon RE Super. Among these is the through-the-lens exposure metering. This enabled improved exposure accuracy, especially in close-up macro photography using bellows or extension rings, and in telephotography with long lenses. In addition to this feature, the metering is at full aperture. For this purpose the RE-lensese have an aperture simulator that relays the preset aperture to the exposure meter at full aperture, retaining a bright viewfinder image while determining the correct exposure, avoiding the stop-down method. The meter also works independently of the pentaprism finder, which allows for different viewfinder configurations. The meter cell is actually incorporated in the camera's reflex finder mirror. This was accomplished by milling narrow slits in the mirror surface letting a fraction of the light through to the CdS cell placed just behind it.
Identifying the different models (elsewhere/USA)
All models were available in chrome or black enamel finish.
Tokyo Kogaku KK
Tokyo Kogaku KK launched their first 35mm SLR camera in 1957, about two years before the Nikon F and the Canonflex. This was the Topcon R that acquired the bayonet lens mount from the Exakta Varex camera from Ihagee in Dresden, successor to the Kine Exakta of 1936. It was also inspired by the Zeiss Ikon Contax S as well as the Japanese Miranda T - most obviously the body shape by the former, and the detachable finder prism by the latter. However, it was not until 1963 the Topcon name became famous by introducing the Topcon RE Super, an event that took the entire camera industry by surprise: This camera featured through-the lens (TTL) exposure metering, and at full lens aperture at that. The RE Super was fully prepared for professional work supported by a choice of lenses and accessories to complement it. The United States importer was the Charles Beseler Company and it was sold as the Beseler Topcon Super D.[tpl]cite book|title=The Register of 35mm Single Lens Reflex Cameras Second Ed.|author=Rudolph Lea|publisher=Wittig Books Hückelhoven|year=1993|isbn=3-88984-130-9[/tpl]
The interchangeable lenses for the RE Super
In addition, a range of special lenses were also available for flash and macro work, among these was:

==References==


