[[Marysville Gold Sox]]

CATEGORIES: Western Baseball League teams, Horizon Air Summer Series, Companies based in Yuba County, California, Sports in Yuba County, California, Baseball teams in California

The Marysville Gold Sox is a summer collegiate wood-bat club based in Marysville, California, in the United States. The team is host of the Horizon Air Summer Series and plays its home games at Appeal-Democrat Park, formerly known as Bryant Field, adjacent to Ellis Lake, in Marysville. The team name was changed from Yuba-Sutter Gold Sox to Marysville Gold Sox in 2010 to more particularly identify the city in which the team is located.Yuba-Sutter no more...

==Team history==

The franchise began as a professional team in the Western Baseball League in 1995 as the Surrey Glaciers and only played one season at Stetson Bowl in Surrey, British Columbia, Canada. In 1996 they relocated to Reno, Nevada, becoming known as the Reno Chukars and played their home games at Moana Stadium. They changed their name to the Reno Blackjacks in 1999 and played their final season in Reno before relocating to Marysville, where they were renamed the Feather River Mudcats for their inaugural 2000 season in Marysville.
Because of the team's infringement on the previously trademarked name of Mudcats by the Carolina Mudcats of the Southern League, the Feather River Mudcats changed their name to the Feather River Fury in preparation for the 2001 season, though never took the field under that name since the team filed for bankruptcy prior to the season start. There was no baseball in Marysville for the 2001 season.
The City of Marysville stepped in to operate the team for the 2002 season in order to keep baseball alive in the area and the city-owned ballpark in use. The City changed the name to Yuba-Sutter Gold Sox and played the season in the Western Baseball League. Upon conclusion of that 2002 season the Western Baseball League disbanded, thus ending the Gold Sox as a professional team.
The team was purchased from the City in 2003 by Bob Bavasi of Bavasi Sports Partners and local auto dealer Don McCullough (1936–2005) and began 2003 season play as a summer collegiate wood-bat team as it remains to this day.
The ball club played the 2003 and 2004 seasons in the California Collegiate League.
In 2005, the Gold Sox became the host team for the Horizon Air Summer Series, a collegiate wood bat league created by Bob Bavasi.
Prior to the 2005 season, Don McCullough died. Upon McCullough's death, Peter Bavasi, former General Manager of the San Diego Padres, President of the Toronto Blue Jays and Cleveland Indians, came out of retirement to help administer the club for the 2005 and 2006 seasons.
On January 1, 2007, Bob Bavasi invited Fair Oaks, California attorney Tom Lininger and his wife Karyn to join in the ownership of the club as majority shareholders. Tom Lininger became the team's Managing Partner and remains in that position today.
The Gold Sox name was chosen in honor of Yuba-Sutter (two adjoining counties separated by a river with the towns of Marysville and Yuba City on each side), having been called the "Gateway to the Gold Fields" during the California gold rush of the mid-1800s. The Gold Sox mascot is Mr. G, a gecko-like creature that is a favorite with children.

==Year-by-year record==

==Notable alumni==

==Coaching Staff==

==Radio broadcasts==

The Gold Sox official flagship radio station is KUBA-AM 1600 in Yuba City and Marysville with Geoff Flynn serving as play-by-play commentator.

==References==

==External links==


