[[Parasmani]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 films, Indian films, Hindi-language films, Compositions by Laxmikant-Pyarelal

Parasmani ('Philosopher's stone' that converts iron into gold) is a Hindi film of 1963. The film is a musical fantasy drama shot in Black and White as well as colour. It has been directed by Babubhai Mistri, who is known as the pioneer of cinematic effects.PioneerSpecial effects The film was declared as ''hit" at the box office.1963 Boxoffice ratings

==Plot==

Paras (played by Mahipal) is the son of the Senapati and is lost when their ship strikes storm at sea. Paras is then found by a poor villager, who brings him up as his own. Paras grows up and accomplishes himself as a swordsman and a singer. One day he encounters the princess (played by Gitanjali) and falls in love with her. His fame soon reaches the palace, and the Emperor summons him to sing for him. Pleased with his singing, the Emperor asks him for a wish, and Paras asks for the hand of his daughter. Enraged, the Emperor decides to punish Paras. But Paras escapes. Appearing defeated, the Emperor asks Paras to seek a rare gem called as Parasmani, because he is undergoing a curse that as soon as his daughter will marry somebody, it will be the last day for the Emperor. If Paras is able to get the 'parasmani' the life of Emperor can be saved. Then only can he marry his daughter. Parasmani is a hypothetical jewel which is considered to keep the bearer young forever. Paras agrees to this and leaves on the search with his sister and brother.
Paras receives clues from various places and then enters in a cave. The film from now onwards is in Eastman Color. Fighting various magical creatures and volcanic lava, Paras meets the Sorceress Mayanagri who falls in love with the brave Paras. Taking him in confidence, she shows him her real self, which is an old woman. The Sorceress shows him the Parasmani which Paras gains after killing the spider type creature. Soon the old sorceress also meets her end, Paras and his siblings fly back to their kingdom where after some crucial fights he also meets his father Senapati and is married to the princess.

==Cast==

==Soundtrack==

The music of the film is composed by Laxmikant Pyarelal.

This film is the first independent film together of the musical duo Laxmikant Pyarelal. Before this they have worked under many musicians separately as well as together. This film also marks the beginning of the long relationship between them, Lata Mangeshkar and Rafi.Lata's interview
"Hasta Hua Noorani Chehra" is also used in the film Hum Aapke Hain Koun..! while the characters are playing a game.

==References==

==External links==


