[[Wesley Crusher]]

CATEGORIES: Star Trek: The Next Generation characters, Star Trek (film franchise) characters, Starfleet ensigns, Starfleet officers, Fictional aviators, Fictional ensigns, Fictional characters introduced in 1987, Child characters in television

Wesley Crusher is a fictional character in the television series Star Trek: The Next Generation, appearing regularly in the first four seasons and sporadically afterwards. He is the son of Beverly Crusher and is portrayed by actor Wil Wheaton.

==Overview==

In the television series Star Trek: The Next Generation, Wesley Crusher first arrives on the Enterprise-D with his mother, soon after Captain Jean-Luc Picard assumes command. Crusher's father was killed while under Picard's command, with Picard delivering the message to Wesley and to his mother, Beverly. Picard initially found Crusher irritating, as he is often uncomfortable around all children, a fact which he discloses to his second, William Riker in the pilot episode "Encounter at Farpoint". In early episodes of the series, Picard does not allow Crusher on the bridge of the ship. However, through the progression of the series, Picard comes to realize that Crusher understands many things beyond his age and has inherited his mother's high level of intelligence, while Crusher himself also learns to overcome his initial animosity towards Picard following his father's death. Picard begins to afford Crusher more opportunities on board the ship. An alien known as the Traveler tells Captain Picard that Wesley possesses a unique intelligence and great potential when provided encouragement and opportunity, comparing him to a child prodigy like Mozart. Picard soon appoints Crusher as an acting ensign.
Crusher eventually takes the entrance exam for Starfleet Academy. His test score ranks lower than required, and he is not accepted into the Academy in his first attempt, as detailed in the episode "Coming of Age". Later, he misses his second chance to take the Academy entrance exam during the episode "Ménage à Troi" in which he  assists the Enterprise-D crew in rescuing Riker, Deanna Troi, and Lwaxana Troi from hostile Ferengi, for which Picard grants him a field promotion to full ensign.
Crusher is then invited to reapply the following year, taking the exam and being accepted into the Academy where he joins an elite group of cadets known as Nova Squadron. His involvement with this group leads to his losing academic credits ("The First Duty"), when a squadron-mate is killed attempting a dangerous and prohibited flight maneuver and, under pressure from the team leader Nick Locarno, Crusher abets the squadron's efforts to cover up the truth. Although the crew's intervention and Crusher's own testimony saves him from expulsion, all of Cadet Crusher's academic credits for the year are canceled and he is required to repeat the year and graduate after most of the rest of his class. He remains in the Academy thereafter until the Traveler re-contacts him, whereupon he resigns his commission and goes with the Traveler to explore other planes of reality ("Journey's End").
He is next seen sitting next to his mother in the background of the wedding scenes in Star Trek: Nemesis. In a scene deleted from the movie,Star Trek: Nemesis 2002. Paramount Pictures. DVD. Captain Picard asks Crusher if he's excited to serve on board the USS Titan (Captain Riker's ship), and Crusher tells him that he will be running the night shift in Engineering. This implies (though the scene was deleted) that Wesley returned to Starfleet at some point prior to the events of the film. However, the subsequently released A Time to... novel miniseries and the 2007 novel relaunch of Star Trek: The Next Generation revealed that Crusher had become a full-fledged Traveler. He was wearing a Starfleet uniform in Star Trek: Nemesis because he had mistakenly arrived to Riker and Troi's wedding naked, expecting a Betazoid wedding. Several years later, Crusher enlisted the aid of the Enterprise-E crew in stopping a powerful machine from destroying all organic life in the galaxy (Cold Equations: The Body Electric).

==Reception==

Many fans, including Wil Wheaton himself,[tpl]cite web|url=http://www.tvsquad.com/2008/04/28/star-trek-the-next-generation-code-of-honor/|title=Star Trek: The Next Generation: Code of Honor|accessdate=2011-08-03|publisher=TV Squad|author=Wil Wheaton[/tpl] considered the character to be a Mary Sue and a stand-in for Gene Roddenberry, whose middle name was "Wesley". [ref]
