[[IVisitor]]

CATEGORIES: Articles created via the Article Wizard, Access control software

iVisitor is a web based visitor management system provided by Veristream, a subsidiary of Infrasafe, Inc. Veristream is a software-as-a-service (SaaS) provider committed to protecting enterprise, small business, multi tenant and healthcare facilities from security risks.http://www.ucop.edu/busops/ivisitorinfo.html

==Description==

Veristream's iVisitor is used in some of the world's largest buildings, including the Willis Tower (formerly the Sears Tower) and the AON Center.  iVisitor replaces the paper log book, allowing for increased security. After the 9/11 attacks, security in such high profile buildings needed a change and a more secure system that could screen visitors, allow for black-lists and many other security features.
For more than a decade, iVisitor has been the leading lobby technology in helping building owners adopt and implement new processes consistent with the needs of today's tenants. In order to bridge the historic lack of lobby technology gap, two keys to a successful transformation is an easy to use system and one accessible to all building occupants. This fills the previous communication gap between tenants and security personnel, now allowing real time information sharing. Without common networks across tenants, the result is an on-line, web-based service that supports the consistent delivery of security communications.
iVisitor by Veristream replaces the paper visitor logbook with a real-time web-based system, which every tenant can manage. Instead of a guest signing a paper logbook visible to other guests, tenants can now pre-register visitors through their personal iVisitor account enabling guest check-in at the lobby. When guests check-in, tenants are notified by email, SMS and even push notifications to an iPhone."The evolution of lobby technology: From paper visitor logbooks to efficient guest systems." New York Real Estate Journal. Link to article
The visitor-management system is accessed by a receptionist in the lobby who uses a computer terminal to get to the iVisitor database via a standard Web browser. Tenants are required to preregister anticipated visitors at a password-protected Web site. When the record is selected, the system sends a real-time notification to the tenant and automatically generates a printed bar-code badge that allows access for a predetermined amount of time. The paper badge can be swiped through the turnstile readers like a regular access control card. This feature of the visitor management system provides security with an audit trail.
The system also accommodates walk-ins, because it operates in real time. When an unexpected visitor arrives, security phones the designated contact person, who then enters the guest into the system. The system also allows tenants to place individuals on a barred list—unwanted solicitors or spouses in cases of domestic violence, for example.Longmore-Etheridge, Ann. "Sears Tower's Well Grounded Security". Security Management. iVisitor in The Sears Tower
In case of an emergency or building evacuation, iVisitor’s architecture allows for the real-time collection of visitor information from any computer at any time."Infrasafe Provides Web-Based Visitor Management to Improve Security and Eliminate Lines." CR80News. iVisitor in the Aon Center
The kiosk system is integrated with the access control system’s database. Employees who have forgotten their badges can swipe their driver’s license at the kiosk, and if the database confirms that the person is a current employee, it prints a paper badge valid for that day.Longmore-Etheridge, Ann. "Sears Tower's Well Grounded Security". Security Management. iVisitor in The Sears Tower

==References==

==External links==


