[[Rocco Sinisgalli]]

CATEGORIES: Italian art historians

Rocco Sinisgalli (born 1947) is an Italian art historian, writer and architecture theoretician. http://www.clarkart.edu/research/fellows-view.cfm?ID=422&Fellow=1
Born at Gallicchio, in the province of Potenza, he has been educated in an Italian classical “Liceo”. He obtained a degree in Architecture in 1973 at the University of Rome “La Sapienza”. He teaches and carries out his research at the Faculty of Architecture Valle Giulia, University of Rome La Sapienza.  
He has been national co-ordinator of research among the Universities of Rome, Trieste and Genoa. He has also been the director of a bilateral research program with France (Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique-Paris —Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche-Rome). Scientist responsible for the Italian party, he organized the International Symposium in France on “'Desargues et son temps' (Paris - Lyon, 25–30 November 1991), where he was a member of the committee, in Paris, for the examinations for the 'Doctorat dans l’Histoire de la Perspective.' Rocco Sinisgalli is a historian of perspective seen as an art, a science and a technique. Appointed Raffaello Sanzio Academician in Urbino he established in the same city the “International Center of Studies: Urbino e la Prospettiva. 
He is known for works, concerning Ptolemy, Jordanus, Commandino, Guidobaldo Del Monte, Stevin, Borromini, Maurolico, Leonardo and Alberti; that aim to a better historical view of geometry and representation in art and architecture. 
In 1986 he was responsible for the “Sezione Spazio” at the “Art and Science” Biennale in Venice. In 1990 he established, at the Swiss Institute in Rome, «I lunedì della Prospettiva», a series of lectures on History of Perspective. Speaker at national and international symposia, he gave lectures in Italy and abroad, receiving prizes and grants for his works.
Fellow
1975: Paris, Centre Alexandre Koyré;
1984: Paris, Centre Alexandre Koyré; 
1988: Washington D.C., National Gallery of Art (CASVA);
1988: Los Angeles, Getty Center (guest scholar);
1991: Los Angeles, Getty Center (guest scholar); 
1992: Washington D.C., National Gallery of Art (CASVA); 
2006: Williamstown (Massachusetts), Clark Art Institute; 
2007: Brussels, Royal Flemisch Academy of Belgium for Science and the Arts (VLAC).
Honors
2003: Raffaello Sanzio Academician (Urbino);
2005: Honorary President - International Center of Studies “Urbino e la Prospettiva”
2007: President - National Center of Studies “Ut Pictura Poesis” (Quintus Horatius Flaccus)

==Publications==

He has published twenty-three books, among these, the following are in English: 
1) A history of the perspective scene from the Renaissance to the Baroque (Florence 2000); 
2) A voyage into baroque spectacle. The Gallery in the Palazzo Spada (Rome 2001);  
3) The New De Pictura of Leon Battista Alberti (Rome 2006);  
4) The Vitruvian Man of Leonardo (Florence, 2006);  
5) Leonardo and the Divine Proportion (Florence, 2007).
6) Leon Battista Alberti. On painting. A New Translation and Critical Edition,
New York 2011, Cambridge University Press.
7) Perspective in the Visual Culture of Classical Antiquity, New York 2012,
Cambridge University Press.

==References==


