[[Law School of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki]]

CATEGORIES: Law schools, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 1930 establishments in Greece

The Law School of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki is considered one of the most prestigious Greek law schools. It is ranked first among the Greek law schools and is considered one of the 200 best law schools in the world.

==History==

The law department was founded and began its operation in 1930  during the premiership of Alexandros Papanastassiou. One of the first 5 faculties of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki was the Faculty of Law and Economics consisting of two departments, Law Department and Economics and Political Science Department. A special committee took place (composed of Professors A. Andreades, K. Varvaressos, S. Seferiades and C. Sfiris) in order to elect the first professors of the Law school; Periklis Vizoukides (who was the first Dean of the faculty and afterwards rector of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki), Professor of Civil Law, Xenophon Zolotas Politic Economy professor, Jean Spiropoulos Professor of International Law, Dimosthenis Stefanides Politic Economy professor and Thrasivoulos Haralambides Professor of Commercial law. Lately in '00s, Faculty of Law and Economics was expanded with Political Science department and hence was renamed into Faculty of Law, Economics and Political Science. In 1962 the graduate program (the first LLM in Greece) of the law school began its operation. Law school takes part in many international law competitions such as Ph. Jessup Moot Court International competition. In this competition, Law School of Thessaloniki in 2005 came 1st among 600 universities from all over the world (in the writing part of the competition), 5th in 2001, 4th in 2004 (in the writing part of the competition), 6th in 2007 and 5th in 2008, 3rd in 2009. In addition, in 2011 law school came first in Europe as it participated in a competition which was organized by the World Trade Organization, accomplishing to beat popular law schools such as Oxford's, King's College and LSE's law schools.

==Pr. Ioannis Deligiannis Library==

Dean Pr. Dimitrios Papasteriou took initiative to organize Law school's library and hence the library was established in 1998. It is located on the third floor of the Faculty of Law, Economics and Political Science. It is called Pr. Ioannis Deligiannis library in the honour of the popular civil law professor (and rector of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki) Ioannis Deligiannis. Until recently, most books were kept in law school's departments.Pr. Deligiannis library has acquired donations by famous professors and politicians such as Alexandros Papanastasiou, Aristovoulos Manesis, Alexandros Svolos, Themistoklis Tsatsos, H. Muller etc. In addition USA government has made a donation to the library. Pr. Deligiannis library is the largest law library in Greece.

==Notable alumni and professors==

The law school has produced leaders in law, government, and society, including:

File:Venizelos Evangelos min.jpg|Evangelos Venizelos, former Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister, member of the Greek Parliament.

==See also==

==Sources==

«Σχολή Νομικών, Οικονομικών και Πολιτικών Επιστημών: 75 χρόνια», Αριστοτέλειο Πανεπιστήμιο Θεσσαλονίκης, εκδ. Α.Π.Θ. (Faculty of Law, Economics and Political Science: 75 years, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, A.U.Th. publications)

