[[Widening income gap in India]]

CATEGORIES: Income in India, Socioeconomics, Income distribution, Economic inequality, Distribution of wealth

Widening income gap in India. Despite being part of the four nations housing the highest number of billionaires, a shocking 836 million people in India live below the poverty line.  Specifically speaking – living on less than 50 cents per day.  Contrary to popular belief, India’s income inequality has grown considerably, rising from a historic low of 29.6 in 1990 to 32.5 in 2000 (a noticeable rise of 9.7%.)"India struggles with income gap"

==Regional differences==

With that said, these far-flung areas, difficult terrain and being a highly populous country exemplifies India’s issue of growing income inequality. The rich region in India, Western India, has a mean household per capita income of $850 as opposed to $536 in Eastern India, hence bringing India’s Gini coefficient to 0.45. This disparity in income, expenditure and savings pattern is not only prevalent between rural and urban India but now also between large and small cities."Income inequality in India: growth, health and development"

==Economic growth and poverty reduction==

Many economists to this day argue that although economic growth is a prerequisite for poverty reduction in India, as seen by bringing millions out of poverty, it may have also worsened living conditions of some poor, thus leading to a widening income gap."Income Inequality growing in India"

==WHO study in 2000==

Even though India has achieved remarkable economic growth (a key component required before economic development takes place), its blatant and widening income inequality severely impacts access to education and healthcare. A study published by the World Health Organisation in 2000 concluded that it is the wealthier citizens who benefit most from public healthcare because facilities are generally better in rich areas. As for the poor areas, low wages, long working hours, lack of basic services scuh as first aid, drinking water and sanitation characterize them. Without access to basic amenities, the poverty-reducing impact seems fruitless."India still suffers from huge income gap"

==Safety nets==

N. C. Saxena, a member of the National Advisory Council, suggests that the widening income disparity can be accounted for by India’s badly shaped agricultural and rural safety nets. “Unfortunately, agriculture is in a state of collapse. Per capita food production is going down. Rural infrastructure such as power, road transport facilities are in a poor state,” he said. “All the safety net programmes are not working at all, with rural job scheme and public distribution system performing far below their potential. This has added to the suffering of rural India while market forces are acting in favour of urban India, which is why it is progressing at a faster rate”."Income gap rises in India: NSSO"

==Notes==


