[[Graham Boynton]]

CATEGORIES: Rhodesian writers, Zimbabwean writers, Zimbabwean journalists, Zimbabwean non-fiction writers, University of Natal alumni, People from Bulawayo, Living people

Graham Boynton is a British-born Zimbabwean journalist, consultant, travel writer and editor. 

==Background==

Boynton was born in Britain and raised in Bulawayo,Stubborn isolation New Statesman. 11 December 1998 Rhodesia where he was educated at Peterhouse and Christian Brothers College.  He later graduated from the University of Natal in neighbouring South Africa.  He began a career in journalism as a political reporter during the Rhodesian Bush War.  His reportage in South Africa led to the apartheid government declaring him an 'undesirable alien' and they subsequently deported him. He subsequently established himself in London, writing for international magazines. In the mid eighties he was appointed editor of Business Traveller magazine. In 1988 he moved to New York where he worked as a writer and editor for Condé Nast Publications for ten years. He was an editor at Condé Nast Traveler and a contracted writer for Vanity Fair.Editor Ultratravel and Group Travel Editor, Telegraph Media Group International Luxury Travel Market. Retrieved on 1 January 2011 He also wrote for a number of other publications in America and the UK.
In 1998 he returned to Britain to become the travel editor of the Daily and Sunday Telegraph. A year earlier he  published Last Days in Cloud Cuckooland about the end of white rule in South Africa.African Sunset Business Week. 15 September 1997 It was named as one of the Washington Post's Best Non Fiction Books of 1998. He was Group Travel Editor of the Telegraph Media Group from 1998 to December 2011.
He also regularly contributes pieces about Zimbabwe.Ian Smith has sadly been proved right The Telegraph. 22 November 2007Telegraph Christmas Appeal: we must not forget Zimbabwe The Telegraph. 27 November 2010Zimbabwe tourism: should we go back? The Telegraph. 24 September 2010
He is married to the travel writer, Adriaane Pielou and they have two children together including the actress Lucy Boynton.My Lucy, the film star Daily Telegraph. 30 December 2006

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


