[[TSS Hibernia (1899)]]

CATEGORIES: 1899 ships, Passenger ships of the United Kingdom, Steamships, Clyde-built ships, Ships of the London and North Western Railway, Maritime incidents in 1915, Armed boarding steamers of the Royal Navy

TSS ''Hibernia was a twin screw steamer passenger vessel operated by the London and North Western Railway from 1900 to 1914.Railway and Other Steamers, Duckworth. 1962 She was renamed 'HMS Tara''' on requisition by the Admiralty in 1914, and sunk in action in  November 1915.

==History==

She was built by William Denny and Brothers of Dumbarton for the London and North Western Railway in 1899 and introduced into service in 1900.
In 1914 she was requisitioned by the Admiralty as an Armed boarding steamer and renamed HMS ''Tara''.
She was torpedoed by [tpl]SMU|U-35|Germany|2[/tpl] in Sollum Bay, Mediterranean Sea on 5 November 1915. The crew were saved by the U Boat and handed over to Senussi tribesmen as prisoners. On 14 March 1916 they were being held at Bir Hakeim along with the crew of the HMT Moorina, a horse transport. They were rescued by the Duke of Westminster's armoured car brigade, part of the Western Frontier Force. The captain of the Tara at this time was Capt. R. Gwatkin-Williams, R.N.Steel Chariots in the Desert. S.C. Rolls, 1937. Leonaur Books. pp. 38-53
The story of the TARA's crew is told by Captain Gwatkin-Williams in his book Prisoners of the Red Desert, Being a Full and True History of the Men of the TARA.  The POWs were not held in a traditional POW camp, but rather at a desert oasis guarded by a few Turks and Arabs.  Although only loosely guarded their escape was prevented by the surrounding desert and their general lack of food and water.  Near the end of their captivity, inspired by their hopeless situation, Captain Gwatkin-Williams did attempt escape.  After walking through the desert for two days he blundered into an Arab camp while walking at night and was recaptured and returned to Bir Hakeim.  Captain Gwatkin-Williams estimates the prisoners were only a few days from death due to starvation when they were rescued by the Duke of Westminster.  The Duke's rescue operation is itself quite a story.  After accidentally finding a letter from Captain Gwatkin-Williams to a Turkish officer stating the desperation of the situation a Bir Hakeim the Duke set off to find the POWs.  With a guide who had been to Bir Hakeim some 30 years previously as a boy he set off across the desert estimating that he was about 70 miles away.  Passing the 70 mile estimate and running low on fuel he kept going as long as there was any hope, finding the camp after traversing 115 miles.Gwatkin-Williams, Captain R.S.; Prisoners of the Red Desert, Being a Full and True History of the Men of the Tara.  Thornton Butterworth, LTD, London. Circa 1921.

==References==


