[[Small-scale project management]]

CATEGORIES: Project management

Small-scale project management is the specific type of project management of small-scale projects. These projects are characterised by factors such as short duration; low person hours; small team; size of the budget and the balance between the time committed to delivering the project itself and the time committed to managing the project. They are otherwise unique, time delineated and require the delivery of a final output in the same way as large-scale projects.

==Overview==

Small-scale projects are by far the most common form of project enacted by institutions and large-scale organisations who may use small projects in order to accomplish a range of small-order tasks. For SME’s and micro-businesses, especially in the creative industries, the running of small projects may be an essential component of their core business. Individuals and groups regularly use small-scale projects as a means to delivering a range of outcomes from organising a village fete to building a garden shed.
The balance between ‘process’ over ‘output’ is a key factor for consideration when looking at the effectiveness of applying project management methodologies to smaller projects. Other factors commonly associated with large-scale project management, for example time, cost and quality,Watson, M (2002) Managing Smaller Projects Project Manager Today Publications still apply and broadly there are two approaches that can be taken:

==Quality Management==

The 'management overhead' describes the ratio between the effort required to document or manage a process and the eventual outcome of a project. With large-scale project methodologies the quality management is an important part of a project's process and aims to provide for continual improvement and a project output that meets the requirements of the end user. On small-scale projects it is not always possible to use standard quality management approaches due to limitations of time, budget and resources. There is still however a need to be creative and innovative while maintaining quality standards that, especially in the creative industries, maybe difficult to define or evaluate, and may defy simple categorisation. It is important to recognise that quality is an innate characteristic that we instinctively recognise. We know quality when we see it but find ‘it’ hard to say what it is in advance.Sower, V.E. & Fair, F.K. (2005) There is more to quality than continuous improvement: Listening to Plato QMJ Vol 2 No. 1  Insight, intuition and creativity are indicators of quality that on a small-scale project are perhaps better evaluated on an instinctive level i.e. “is it good enough”. Any lightweight, lean or small-scale project management methodology must scale back process management and documentation to an optimum level. A level which does not overburden the project with unnecessary administration and does not commit scarce resources to a quality management approach that constricts the ability to be creative and innovate. A simple evaluation based on an elaboration of the question “is it good enough” may well suffice for the purpose of many small-scale projects.

==Creativity, Innovation and Implementation==

“Innovation equals creativity plus implementation”,Von Stamm, B. (2003) Managing Innovation, Design and Creativity Wiley where Creativity is a balance of “imagination and analysis”,Plsek, P.E (2005) Working Paper: Models for the Creative Process Directed Creativity http://www.directedcreativity.com/pages/WPModels.html 20th Nov 2005 and implementation is a process of idea selection, development and commercialisation. This suggests there is a requirement for a two phase solution for the implementation of small-scale projects. The first phase being one of problem definition, analysis, and critical thinking; followed by a second action or implementation phase where the prime activity is  the application of skills and knowledge to implement the creative idea. The breaking down of the process of innovation into two fundamental stages offers the possibility for thinking about small-scale projects as a two stage process. That of innovation and innovation implementation.

==Scaling PRINCE2==

The use of flexibile conceptual framework with integrated elements of the PRINCE2 methodology allows for the planning of small-scale projects to be structured a ‘Work Breakdown Schedule’[ref]Bentley, C. (2006) PRINCE2 Revealed: including how to use PRINCE2 for small projects Butterworth-
Heineman[/ref] using the general headings:
This approach provides an effective and flexible framework for documenting a small-scale project using a PID which includes a Project Plan at its heart. This model offers a lightweight approach to documenting the project that is eminently scalable and does not add an unnecessary management burden to a small-scale project process. Consequently the framework offers a set of tools that will enhance quality and mirrors the two phases associated with innovation and innovation implementation. It therefore seems ideal for managing small-scale projects in the creative industries and can be easily adapted to suit industry specific work-flows and terminology.

==Managing Project Risk==

A simple risk assessment tool should be integral to the planning process and team members can be encouraged to use the risk assessment as a tool of critical enquiry that will help them identify risk factors and opportunities as part of a continual, iterative cycle offering a small project an easy and effective way of documenting its progress in a reflexive manner. 
Any projects that have a degree of complexity in the implementation phase might need to further sub-divide this phase using milestones, or checkpoints that allow the team to see if it is on track and this process could be easily integrated into the risk assessment tool. 
The adoption of a risk assessment tool will enable the project manager to deal with exceptions or changes to the project as they arise and enables a flexible approach to implementing the project. The key to a ‘reflexive’ approach to exception and change is the way in which ‘tolerance’ is applied to the project i.e. amount by which the Project Manager or Project Team may deviate from the project plan (in relation to time, cost and quality) without the need to refer up to the chain of command or initiate codified exception or change protocols. 
Risk assessment can easily be combined with an exception planning procedure to manage tolerance to changes in a project. The use of ‘triggers’ to initiate exception management procedures in order to deal with issues such as scope creep; changes in aims and objectives; changes in constraints; and changes in risk. Such a tool offers a method for interrogating the project brief during the implementation phase and should be used as part of the planning and review process. The use of a numerical factor gives a simple scale that triggers a response in accordance with previously agreed criteria. 
Thus the Project Manager is able to make judgements about change and can be given a degree of autonomy taking into account their level of experience.

==Adopting an AGILE approach==

The Agile Manifesto:
Agile project management is risk & value driven i.e. an agile project plan need only address risks in relation to the projects values. The approach formulated by DeCarloDeCarlo, D. (2004) Extreme Project Management, Jossey-Bass offers the following values as key to a 'sufficient methodology' for a projects success:
There is a focus on learning in Agile project management methodologies that uses iterative reflection as an organisational tool. Agile is about learning in real environments rather than by modeling and simulation. This is achieved by breaking the project into “time boxes” or stages sometimes referred to as “sprints”. At the end of each 'time box” the project team review and evaluate using a risk tool asking what have we learnt from this stage and what will we now change. The PID after a review might change fundamentally according to what has been learnt.
Risk tools promote group discussion and reflection and are iterative across project life cycles or time boxes. A simple risk assessment may not suffice with an Agile approach however as it only captures the negative or “jeopardy risks” excluding the “opportunity risks” . On creative or experimental projects the “opportunity risks” are of great importance since they may bring value to the project that had not been initially conceptualised.
At the completion of each iteration the project team might be required to use a simple tool such as a SWOT analysis as a risk register which captures both positive and negative risk attributes. After prioritising this list the top three on the positive and negative categories on the risk register then become the actions for the next “time box”. Risks can be dealt with following a simple mantra of "avoid/transfer/mitigate/enhance". In this way 'risk becomes the a structuring tool that keeps the project Agile.

==Application==

A template for a simple set of tools which are the optimum required for the management of a small-scale project would include:
A final issue of some importance is the need for underpinning support from the host institution or organisation. The guidelines for applying PRINCE2 to small projectsCC&TA (1990)Prince in Small Non-it Projects Stationery Office Books recommend that the institution within which the project is running should as an absolute minimum, provide a ‘Project Support Office’ to assist with the project's planning; to monitor progress on the part of the project board; to provide a quality assurance role; and provide an experienced but independent sounding board or mentoring role. This support role would enable the umbrella institution to ensure that the project properly represents the host institution's business and organisational objectives and could provide professional advice and support for inexperienced project teams. In cases where appropriate organisational support is in place, the adoption of a small-scale project management methodology such as the one proposed above will go someway towards enabling projects to run effectively and to deliver their outputs in terms of time, cost and quality.

==References==


