[[Hereditarnia]]

CATEGORIES: Graph theory, Mathematics conferences

Hereditarnia is a virtual pleasant place that is related to the development of the theory of hereditary properties of graphs (a part of graph theory). Hereditarnia is a special word that cannot be found in any dictionary. It was invented by Izak Broere. It is a combination of English word heredity and a quite common Polish suffix 'arnia' that is used in many words denoting pleasant places like kwiaciarnia, piwiarnia, Palmiarnia Zielenogórska, winiarnia, etc.

==Hereditary properties of graphs==

A property of a graph is an isomorphism-closed subset of the set of all finite non-oriented graphs. A property is called hereditary if it is closed under taking subgraphs. A property is called induced-hereditary if it is closed under taking induced subgraphs. A property is called additive if it is closed under taking disjoint union of graphs. The main concepts related to hereditary properties of graphs can be find in A Survey of Hereditary Properties of Graphs.M. Borowiecki, I. Broere, M. Frick, P. Mihók, G. Semanišin :A Survey of Hereditary Properties of Graphs, Discussiones Mathematicae – Graph Theory 17 (1997) 5–50.

==Hereditarnia Club==

The scientific society Hereditarnia ClubHereditarnia Club, Hereditarnia Club homepage was founded in March 1996 by Mieczysław Borowiecki, Izak BroereIzak Brore's AMS Genealogy Tree and Peter MihókPeter Mihók's AMS Genealogy Tree in order to popularize hereditary properties of graphs. The founders of Hereditarnia Club are called Three Sisters. 
A member of Hereditarnia CLUBHereditarnia Club members, The actual list of members of Hereditarnia Club can be a person who either works in the area of hereditary properties of graphs 
and has taken part in at least two official Hereditarnia workshops or works in the area of hereditary properties of graphs 
and obtains a special permission from at least two founders of Hereditarnia Club. At the head of the club there is  a president that is elected during Annual General Assembly Meeting of Hereditarnia Club. The presidents were:
The main duty of the president is to organise annual workshop Hereditarnia.

==Workshop Hereditarnia==

The workshop HereditarniaWorkshops Hereditarnia, The actual list of members of Hereditarnia Club  is organised regularly since 1998. It is devoted to problems related to hereditary and induced hereditary graph properties. The previous workshops were:
Besides the official workshops there was a small unofficial workshop in September 2002 in Zakopane (Poland). The workshop in 1999 continued for a few days in Stará Lesná (Slovakia). The workshop in 2005 was followed by a Graph Theory Day at the University of Johannesburg (South Africa).

==References==

==External links==


