[[Harvest House International Church]]

CATEGORIES: Charismatic denominations, Christianity in Zimbabwe

Harvest House International church, otherwise popularly known as HHI Church is a vibrant fast growing charismatic church founded in 1995 by Apostles Colin and Sarah Nyathi. From a first service of less than 10 people in their living room in the city of Bulawayo in Zimbabwe in 1995, this church has grown to more than 6000 in attendance on a single Sunday service. Due to the limitation of space, the current building can not take the number of people hence a total of 10 services are carried out on a Sunday.

==Senior Pastors==

Colin and Sarah Nyathi are parents of 4 teenagers. Colin was previously a financial director of a large engineering house in Bulawayo before becoming full-time pastor. Sarah, an entrepreneur, was Miss Lux Zimbabwe and has been involved in lots of training of young entrepreneurs in her nation. Colin functions in the apostolic office and is an unapologetic church planter. He moves tremendously in the ministry of the Holy Spirit and his church has been known for unusual manifestations. They host a television programme dubbed "Open Heavens" which features in Southern Africa. Sarah runs "Maximised Lifestyle International", an arm of HHI Church that helps ladies within the church to be self-sufficient and grow spiritually and in real life. This couple offers spiritual oversight to all their pastors and elders as well as a number from other churches.

==Church Premises==

Currently, their services are held at Cnr George Silundika/13th Avenue in Bulawayo Zimbabwe.

==Other Churches==

HHI has grown and planted churches all over the world and still growing. To date a total of 103 churches have been planted, mostly in Africa. There are churches in Australia - Brisbane and Perth - and in UK, London. The migration of Zimbabweans due to the financial and political crisis that affected that country between 2000 and 2009 saw many sons of this house establish HHI in the various countries of their destination. In Africa, HHI is found in the following countries and still growing: South Africa, Botswana, Swaziland, Zambia, Mozambique, Namibia and Nigeria.

==HHI School of Ministry==

The School of Ministry offers courses as follows:
Since the inception of the school, in the early 2000s more than 7000 people have graduated from the school. At some stage, more than 1000 students had enrolled in this school in one year in the city of Bulawayo. Sister schools have been established in most of the churches around the world. The Zimbabwean School is affiliated to The Ministry of Higher and Tertiary Education and Good Shepherd Ministries, USA.

==New Church Building Complex==

HHI is currently in the process of building, arguably the largest conference centre in Southern Africa, housing 12,000 people. Commissioning of this building is expected some time in 2014.

==External links==


