[[Ron Rivest]]

CATEGORIES: 1947 births, Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences, Members of the United States National Academy of Engineering, Living people, American computer scientists, Public-key cryptographers, Turing Award laureates, People associated with computer security, Massachusetts Institute of Technology faculty, People from Schenectady, New York, American academics, Fellows of the Association for Computing Machinery, American cryptographers, Yale University alumni, Stanford University alumni, Election technology people, People from Arlington, Massachusetts

Ronald Linn Rivest (born 1947) is a cryptographer. He is the Andrew and Erna Viterbi Professor of Computer Science at MIT's Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (EECS) and a member of MIT's Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL). He is a member of the Election Assistance Commission's Technical Guidelines Development Committee, tasked with assisting the EAC in drafting the Voluntary Voting System Guidelines.TGDC members, from the National Institute of Standards and Technology
Rivest is one of the inventors of the RSA algorithm (along with Adi Shamir and Len Adleman). He is the inventor of the symmetric key encryption algorithms RC2, RC4, RC5, and co-inventor of RC6. The "RC" stands for "Rivest Cipher", or alternatively, "Ron's Code". (RC3 was broken at RSA Security during development; similarly, RC1 was never published.)  He also authored the MD2, MD4, MD5 and MD6 cryptographic hash functions. In 2006, he published his invention of the ThreeBallot voting system, a voting system that incorporates the ability for the voter to discern that their vote was counted while still protecting their voter privacy. Most importantly, this system does not rely on cryptography at all. Stating "Our democracy is too important", he simultaneously placed ThreeBallot in the public domain.

==Education==

Rivest earned a Bachelor's degree in Mathematics from Yale University in 1969, and a Ph.D. degree in Computer Science from Stanford University in 1974. He is a co-author of Introduction to Algorithms (also known as 'CLRS'), a standard textbook on algorithms, with Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson and Clifford Stein. He is a member of the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL) in the Theory of Computation Group, and a founder of its Cryptography and Information Security Group. He was also a founder of RSA Data Security (now merged with Security Dynamics to form RSA Security) and of Peppercoin. Professor Rivest has research interests in cryptography, computer and network security, and algorithms.

==Honors and awards==

Rivest is a member of the National Academy of Engineering, the National Academy of Sciences, and is a Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery, the International Association for Cryptologic Research, and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Together with Adi Shamir and Len Adleman, he has been awarded the 2000 IEEE Koji Kobayashi Computers and Communications Award and the Secure Computing Lifetime Achievement Award. He also shared with them the Turing Award. Rivest has received an honorary degree (the "laurea honoris causa") from the Sapienza University of Rome.Biography. Archived from the original on 2011-12-06. He is a Fellow of the World Technology Network and a Finalist for the 2002 World Technology Award for Communications Technology. In 2005, he received the MITX Lifetime Achievement Award.  Rivest was named the 2007 the Marconi Fellow, and on May 29, 2008 he also gave the Chesley lecture at Carleton College.

==Works==

 | authorlink = Thomas H. Cormen
 | first = Thomas H.
 | last = Cormen
