[[Cash Cab (Canadian game show)]]

CATEGORIES: Cash Cab, 2000s Canadian television series, 2008 Canadian television series debuts, Canadian game shows, Television series produced in Toronto, Television series produced in Vancouver

Cash Cab is produced by Castlewood Productions and began airing on September 10, 2008 on Discovery Channel (Canada) and Discovery HD. It is hosted by comedian Adam Growe. The game show airs in Canada instead of the American version of the series, which airs on the affiliated US Discovery Channel network. Cash Cab is the English version of the Cash Cab franchise available in Canada; the French version is called Taxi Payant, and airs on V.

==Game show==

The Canadian version closely mirrors the structure of its US counterpart, retaining familiar features like "Shout Outs", "Red Light Challenges", and the "double or nothing" Video Bonus option at the end of each game. However, the Canadian version differs in its heavier focus on questions of science, technology, nature and adventure, as opposed to purely general knowledge. Regular questions are worth $25, $50, $100; while Red Light Challenge questions are worth $75. In the second season, a third "life line" was added: when contestants reach the $100 questions, they have the option to "swap out" a question, and the Cash Cab dispatcher will give them a new question.
In the Cash Cab Vancouver season, bridge bonus was added, which doubles the score for the current question once per session. After returning to Toronto, a high five bonus was added, which doubles the score for the fifth correct answer in a row.
The Canadian Cash Cab uses eight high definition cameras: five different angles within the cab, two mounted on the roof, and one mobile camera that records on the street or from the follow van. It is also the first Cash Cab format to be taped and broadcast entirely in High Definition. The first two seasons were filmed in downtown Toronto. The cab used is a Toyota Sienna.

==History==

Following the success of the first season, Canada's host Adam Growe was invited to host a special season premiere episode of the American Cash Cab on December 23, 2008, which promoted the feature film Frost/Nixon.
In Summer 2009, Cash Cab was broadcast in a programming block with Qubit.
On July 16, 2011, a 61 year-old man from Surrey, British Columbia was struck and killed in downtown Vancouver by a vehicle used for the Canadian version of Cash Cab. The incident happened while the producer was driving the cab back to the storage facility after filming.TV's "Cash Cab" hits, kills man in VancouverMan dies after collision with 'Cash Cab''Cash Cab' hits and kills 61-year-old man in tragic late-night accident; show had finished filming

==Related shows==

A French Canadian version is also aired on V (formerly known as TQS) and is filmed in Montreal. It is known as Taxi Payant (Paying Taxi) and uses a Dodge Grand Caravan.

==References==


