[[Samuel Benton]]

CATEGORIES: Confederate States Army generals, 1820 births, 1864 deaths, People of Tennessee in the American Civil War, People of Mississippi in the American Civil War, People from Marshall County, Mississippi, Confederate States military personnel killed in the American Civil War

Samuel Benton was born on October 18, 1820, probably in middle Tennessee's Williamson County. He married a "Miss Knox" and was survived by her and a child. Gen. Benton was a prominent lawyer in Holly Springs and also published a newspaper there, The Mississippi Times, Number I of which appeared in April 1853. In politics he was an Old Line Whig but a States Right man also as befits one of his political persuasion. He was a member of both the Union Convention of 1855 and the Mississippi Secession Convention of 1861. He served on the Ways and Means Committee at the Secession Convention. In 1852 he served in the Mississippi state legislature.Confederate Veteran Magazine, Vol. XI, No. 3, May–June 1992

==Civil War Service==

Benton enlisted for Mississippi state service in early 1861.  He was elected captain in the "Old" 9th Mississippi Infantry, 12 month regiment.  In March 1861 the regiment went to Mobile AL, then marched from there to Pensacola, FL.  When the enlistments of the original 9th Regiment soldiers was up, he was made Colonel of the 34th Mississippi Infantry Regiment (known as the 37th Regiment for a short period of time) The Regiment saw its first service under General Earl Van Dorn, during his attempt to drive back the Federal Army during the movement to Corinth, MS after the Battle of Shiloh.  Col Benton was commended, as was the regiment for its behavior during the engagement.
Col Benton and the 34th Mississippi Infantry accompanied General Braxton Bragg's army to Chattanooga, TN in July 1862, then in August joined General William J. Hardee's Corps back to Middle Tennessee, into Kentucky, and fought at the Battle of Perryville, KY, where the 34th fought successfully but at great cost.  Benton was wounded, and his Lt Col and Major were both permanently disabled.  Due to his wounds, Benton was absent from the 34th at Chickamauga.  He was back in command at the Battle of Lookout Mountain, where the regiment was on the picket line at the base of the mountain.  The 34th was overrun by four columns of Union infantry, and around 200 men were captured.
In the Atlanta Campaign, Col Benton commanded the 29th Mississippi Infantry, the 30th Mississippi Infantry, and the 34th at the Battle of Alt's Gap.  Benton commanded the 34th in Walthall's Brigade at the Battle of Resaca.  The Brigade was flanked by Federal artillery, and there are few if any instances during the war of greater losses by artillery fire than Walthall's Brigade at Resaca.  But the brigade was immovable and defended the position for both days.  
Gen. Walthall was promoted to Division Commander, and Benton was given command of the brigade.  At the Battle of Atlanta on Jul 22 1864, while commanding the brigade, Col Samuel Benton was severely wounded, causing the loss of his right leg.  He died six days later in Griffin, GA, two days after being promoted to Brigadier General.Dunbar Rowland "Military History of Mississippi, 1803-1898"
BG Samuel Benton was buried at Griffin, GA, and reinterred after the war in Hillcrest Cemetery in Holly Springs, MS.Confederate Veteran Magazine, Vol. XI, No. 3, May–June 1992
Benton County, MS is named for BG Samuel Benton.

==Notes==


