[[Sevinj Osmanqizi]]

CATEGORIES: 1969 births, People from Baku, Azerbaijani journalists, Living people, Azerbaijani television personalities

Sevinj Osmanqizi (Azerbaijani: Sevinc Osmanqızı) (born 22 June 1969) is a journalist, media personality, author and evening TV show host best known for her serious interviews with various political figures. She is known for her forthright interviewing style, particularly when interrogating politicians.  She is ANS TV network's Chief Editor and News Director, Chairwoman of WMW.  She is the first Azerbaijani woman appointed to a diplomatic post, a CNN World View contributor, and host of the weekly debate programme Open Talk. 

==Biography==

She was born Sevinj Mirzayeva in Baku, Azerbaijan to a well-known journalist  Osman Mirzayev and his wife, newspaper editor Solmaz Mirzayeva.   After the country regained its independence in 1991, her father rose to the position of Senior Advisor to the President of the Azerbaijan Republic.
Osmanqizi's father was killed at 53 on the board of MI-8 military helicopter, carrying an international peacekeeping mission team to Nagorno-Karabakh.   Her father's tragic death greatly affected Osmanqizi.   After graduating from university, she worked as TV reporter and became popular for her news reports from the Nagorno-Karabakh war.   In 1990's she was one of the first news presenters introducing independent from government reporting, contributing a newer, outspoken quality to Azerbaijani television.  In 1992, Osmanqizi demonstrated her distinctive line of questioning in interview with British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.   She has regularly made headlines with interviewees such as James Baker, Margaret Thatcher, Benazir Bhutto and others. She produced two-part documentary investigating the tragedy that the peace mission, including her father.
In 1994 Osmanqizi became the first Azerbaijani woman appointed to a diplomatic post when she was named Deputy Spokeswoman of the Foreign Ministry.   However her diplomatic career was brief; Later in 1994 she moved to UK to work for BBC World Service. 
Upon return to Azerbaijan, Osmanqizi  became Chief Editor of ANS Independent Broadcast Company.   In 2012, she introduced political special Open Talk, a televised debate, hosting political leaders labeled as ‘radical opposition' and blacklisted for decades.  Media experts characterized the debates as the rare exception in the Azeri media offering pluralism of views. 

==Documentaries==

==External links==

==References==


