[[Adrienne Russell]]

CATEGORIES: Articles created via the Article Wizard, University of Denver faculty, University of California, Santa Cruz alumni, Stanford University alumni, Indiana University alumni, Year of birth missing (living people), Living people, American media scholars

Adrienne Russell is an associate professor of Digital Media Studies at the University of Denver and co-director of the Institute for Digital Humanities. She has written mainly on the digital-age evolution of activist communication and journalism. Her most recent book, Networked: A Contemporary History of News in Transition, was published by Polity Press in 2011.

==Biography==

Russell received a Ph.D. in Journalism and Mass Communication from Indiana University, Bloomington, in 2001, an M.S. in Media Studies from Stanford University in 2005, and a B.A. in World Literature and Cultural Studies from University of California, Santa Cruz in 1993.  She was a professor in the Department of Global Communication at the American University of Paris from 2003–2005 and before that she was a Research Fellow at the Annenberg Center for Communication at the University of Southern California.

==Works==

Russell's research centers on the changing relationship between the media and public culture in the digital era. She was one of the author's of Networked Publics (MIT 2008), edited by Kazys Varnelis, which examines the ways that social and cultural shifts created by emergent technologies have transformed our relationships to place, culture, politics, and infrastructure. She co-edited with Nabil Echchaibi the book International Blogging: Identity, Politics and Networked Publics (Peter Lang 2009), which calls into question many assumptions about blogging and addresses the western-focus that characterizes much new-media research. Most recently she wrote Networked: A Contemporary History of News in Transition (Polity 2011), an examination of the transformation that has taken place in journalism since the mid-nineties, the conditions that brought it about, and the characteristics that have shaped it and will shape its future. Drawing on personal interviews with journalists and analysts at the center of the shift, the book examines innovative and revealing digital news projects, and underlines larger cultural changes that reflect the new news reality. 
Russell is a member of the Media Climate research team,  a group of scholars from eighteen countries who are documenting and analyzing national news coverage from countries around the world related to global warming and the annual UN Climate Change Summit.  The research thus far has been published in  the book Reading the Environment: An International Analysis of Press Discourses on the Climate Crisis (Nordicom 2010), edited by Risto Kunelius and Elisabeth Eide, about coverage of the 2009 Copenhagen Climate summit. A forthcoming follow-up book is in the works and will include research on the Cancun (2010) and Durban (2011) South Africa summits.

==External links==


