[[Michael San Nicolas]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 births, Living people, University of Guam alumni, People from Guam, Members of the Legislature of Guam, Guam Democrats, Guam people of Spanish descent, Guam politicians

Senator Michael F.Q. San Nicolas is a currently sitting Democratic senator in the 32nd Guam Legislature. He was elected to the Guam Legislature with 16,625 votes on November 6, 2012.Guam Election Commission, Official 2012 General Election Results, Hagatna, December 2012.  He is the current Chairman of the Committee on Aviation, Ground Transportation, Regulatory Concerns and Future Generations of the Guam Legislature.32nd Guam Legislature, Legislative Committees, Hagatna, 2013.

==Biographical Note==

Michael F.Q. San Nicolas was born on January 30, 1981, the son of Mike Borja San Nicolas and Evangeline Quitugua San Nicolas of Talofofo, Guam, both long-time educators at the Guam Department of Education.  His grandparents are Enrique Santos San Nicolas (dec.), who served in the Guam Congress, Francesca Borja San Nicolas of Talofofo, Guam, and former Speaker of the Guam Legislature Franklin J. Arceo Quitugua and Julia Siguenza Quitugua of Chalan Pago, Guam.KUAM, Michael San Nicolas, Hagatna, July 2012.
Michael San Nicolas attended Father Duenas Memorial High School, John F. Kennedy High School and Southern High for High School, graduating from Southern High School in 1998.  He met his future wife, Kathryn Santos Ko while he attended John F. Kennedy High School.  He received his Bachelor of Arts degree in History from the University of Guam in 2004.
Michael San Nicolas completed the Management Training Program at the Bank of Guam in 2006.  Mr. San Nicolas worked as an Investment Advisor and rose to Assistant Vice President at the Bank of Guam.Pacific Daily News, MICHAEL F.Q. SAN NICOLAS, Hagatna, 2012.
Michael San Nicolas married Kathryn Santos Ko in 2005 and is the father of two children, Kaleb Michael San Nicolas and Katelyn San Nicolas. In 2009, Michael F.Q. San Nicolas wrote a book dedicated to his son, Kaleb, titled "A Father's Hand, Lessons for Life from Father to Son".Michael F.Q. San Nicolas. A Father's Hand, Lessons for Life from Father to Son, Hagatna, 2009.
In 2012, Michael San Nicolas ran for the island-wide office of Senator in the Guam Legislature under the slogan "Let's Build a Responsible Guam".  San Nicolas finished number eight in the Democratic Party Primary with 6,570 votes, higher than three incumbent Senators.  Michael San Nicolas's campaign gained momentum between the primary and the general elections, when he finished number five with 16,625 votes, only one newcomer received more votes.Guam Election Commission, 2012 Election Comparative Analysis Report, Hagatna, July 2013.
Senator Michael F.Q. San Nicolas was sworn into office on January 7, 2013.  As Chairman of the Committee on Aviation, Ground Transportation, Regulatory Concerns and Future Generations, Senator San Nicolas has oversight over the Guam International Airport Authority, Guam Regional Transit Authority, Department of Public Works Bus Operations, the Department of Revenue and Taxation and the Department of Youth Affairs.32nd Guam Legislature, Standing Rules, Hagatna, 2013. As of July 1, 2013, Senator San Nicolas has introduced or co-sponsored twelve bills32nd Guam Legislature, Bills Introduced, Hagatna, 2013. and maintained a strong oversight of the Department of Revenue and Taxation.

==32nd Guam Legislature==

After placing number 5 in the island-wide election, Senator San Nicolas was chosen by his colleagues in the 32nd Guam Legislature to lead the Committee on Aviation, Ground Transportation, Regulatory Concerns and Future Generations.  His committee has held a number of oversight hearings for the Department of Revenue and Taxation, including such issues as long lines experienced by taxpayers at the DepartmentLouella Losinio, Senator hits long lines at Rev and Tax, Marianas Variety, Tamuning, 2 Jul 2013. and tax collections.Frank Whitman, Vice Speaker: 18 hotels are delinquent on occupancy tax, Marianas Variety, Tamuning, 31 Jul 2013.  Senator San Nicolas' committee also has jurisdiction over the Department of Public Works' bus operations, for which it held an oversight hearing in July 2013 to discuss procurement issues and plans for bus operations for the next school year.Louella Losinio, DPW explains side on school bus procurement controversy, Marianas Variety, Tamuning, 11 Jun 2013.
In July 2013, Senator San Nicolas wrote the Attorney General of Guam, Leonardo Rapadas, inquiring whether the implementation of back payments of merit bonuses were implemented properly, because employees of the Department of Education were allowed only three years of merit bonuses, whereas other employees were paid through 1991, when the merit bonus provision was adopted.Louella Losinio, Equal merit bonus pay for GDOE urged, Marianas Variety, Tamuning, 30 Jul 2013.

===Legislative Initiatives===

The first bill of Senator San Nicolas introduced that has become law is the Responsible Boards and Commissions Education Act, now Public Law 32-31.Guam Legislature, 32nd Guam Legislature - Public Laws, Hagatna, 2013.
Senator San Nicolas has also introduced legislation to reduce the statute of limitations for the collection of the Real Property Tax,Louella Losinio, Bill seeks to reduce statute of limitations on property taxes, Marianas Variety, Tamuning, 6 May 2013.Louella Losinio, Senators launch tax initiatives, Marianas Variety, Tamuning, 13 May 2013. the creation of a Responsible Reserve Fund,Louella Losinio, San Nicolas seeks creation of reserve fund for GovGuam, Marianas Variety, Tamuning, 16 May 2013.Louella Losinio, Reserve fund for uncollected GovGuam revenues pushed, Marianas Variety, Tamuning, 17 July 2013. to establish Operational Continuity Plans for the government of Guam,Louella Losinio, GovGuam operational continuity bill, Marianas Variety, Tamuning, 28 May 2013. and to provide funding for merchant services to allow online payments to the government of Guam.Louella Losinio, Bill 158 to push online payments, Marianas Variety, Tamuning, 29 July 2013.
In September 2013, Senator San Nicolas introduced the "Guam Intrastate Securities Exchange Act", which would mandate the creation of an Intrastate Securities Exchange Program within the Guam Economic Development Authority.Louella Losinio, Bill seeks Intrastate Securities Exchange, Marianas Variety, Tamuning, 25 September 2013.Louella Losinio, Lawmaker: Guam ready for local stock market, Marianas Variety, Tamuning, 29 September 2013. The bill would take advantage of the intrastate offering exemption in the Securities Act of 1933 to establish a local exchange program, where local investors can buy stocks, bonds and other securities issued by local businesses.Senator Michael F.Q. San Nicolas. Guam Intrastate Securities Exchange Act, Guam Legislature, Hagatna, Sep 2013.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


