[[Daniel Maier]]

CATEGORIES: English radio writers, English television writers, English humorists, 1968 births, Living people, People from Newcastle upon Tyne

Daniel Maier (born 1968, in Newcastle upon Tyne, England) is a comedy writer and performer for television, radio, print and the stage.
He was educated at the Royal Grammar School of Newcastle upon Tyne.
Since 2002, he has been part of the writing team for ITV1's Bafta Award-winning Harry Hill's TV Burp. In 2010, he wrote two episodes of ITV1 soap opera Emmerdale.Emmerdale episode summary
He has collaborated with Charlie Brooker, writing on the shows You Have Been Watching and How TV Ruined Your Life, and co-writing with Brooker for Sky One the two-part A Touch of Cloth Charlie Brooker pens spoof crime drama for Sky1 in August 2012, starring John Hannah and Suranne Jones. In 2011, Channel 4 announced it was producing a pilot of The Function Room, a sitcom written by Maier, as part of its Comedy Showcase programming strand.Lucky seven announced in new Comedy Showcase series Other television credits include Al Murray’s Personality Disorder, The Peter Serafinowicz Show, Bafta award-winning The Sketch Show and Alistair McGowan's Big Impression.
Maier is the author of the one-act play The Unattended,British Theatre Guide Fringe Reviews performed at the 2006 Edinburgh Festival Fringe; Trapped, a series of half-hour dramas broadcast on BBC Radio 4,Trapped at BBC.co.uk co-written with his brother, the stand-up comedian Mark Maier; as well as writing for and performing in BBC Radio 4 comedy shows including One,One at BBC.co.uk Look Away Now and Broken Arts. He has written and performed a show on Victorian polymath Francis Galton Francis Galton: Polymath, eugenicist, comedian and a paper he wrote on the subject has been published in the academic journal Significance.http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1740-9713.2011.00508.x/abstract Francis Galton: Measuring the immeasurable His first book, Footypedia, was published by Century in June 2008 and his writing appeared in Faber & Faber's book Shouting At The Telly, published in November 2009. Maier is also a contributor to The Guardian,Daniel Maier at The Guardian writing about television and as an occasional World of Lather columnist.
Since 2008, Maier has been a resident judge at the Karaoke Circus shows, both in London and at the Edinburgh Fringe Festival.
In 2010, he compiled the CD Before The Fall for Ace Records.

==References==

==External links==


