[[Marcus Lollius (suffect consul)]]

CATEGORIES: 1st-century BC Romans, 1st-century Romans, Imperial Roman consuls, Senators of the Roman Empire

Marcus Lollius perhaps with the cognomen PaulinusMarcus Lollius no. 5 article at ancient library (flourished second half of 1st century BC & first half of 1st century) was a Roman Senator who served as a consul.Rickman, Roman Granaries and Store Buildings, p.169

==Family Background==

Lollius was a member of the plebeian gens Lollia.Lollia Gens article at ancient libraryMarcus Lollius no. 5 article at ancient library He was the son born to the Roman Politician and Military Officer Marcus LolliusMarcus Lollius’ article at Livius.org from his wife Valeria.Genealogy of M. Lollius by D.C. O’Driscoll Valeria was one of the daughters of the literary patron, consul Marcus Valerius Messalla Corvinus and a sister to the Roman Senators Marcus Valerius Messalla Messallinus and Marcus Aurelius Cotta Maximus Messalinus.Genealogy of M. Lollius by D.C. O’Driscoll Lollius was the namesake of his father and paternal grandfather. His possible brother may have been Publius Lollius Maximus or at least a close relation to his father.Harrison, Homage to Horace: A Bimillenary Celebration, p.290 Publius Lollius Maximus was a soldier who served under the first Roman emperor Augustus;Harrison, Homage to Horace: A Bimillenary Celebration, p.290 later becoming a friend of the Poet Horace;Highet, The Classical Tradition: Greek and Roman Influences on Western Literature, p.96 who became a possible poet, historian and must have been offered a post in the Retinue of the future Roman emperor Tiberius in about 20 BC.Horace, Horace: Epistles Book I, p.136

==Career==

Little is known on the life of Lollius. Lollius served as a consulRickman, Roman Granaries and Store Buildings, p.169 perhaps as a suffect consul in 13.Barrett, Agrippina: Sex, Power and Politics in the Early Empire, p.276
The Horrea Lolliana was either built by his father or Lollius himself.Rickman, Roman Granaries and Store Buildings, p.164 It is known from the inscriptions refer to them and also, from their plan in the Severan Marble Plan of Rome.Rickman, Roman Granaries and Store Buildings, p.164 It seems his family had long trade connections and his family’s name is found among the Italian merchants on the Greek island of Delos in the Hellenistic period.Rickman, Roman Granaries and Store Buildings, p.164

==Wife & Issue==

Lollius married a Roman noblewoman called Volusia Saturnina, a sister to the consul Lucius Volusius Saturninus.Rickman, Roman Granaries and Store Buildings, p.169 and daughter of Quintus Volusius from his wife Claudia, a sister of praetor, Tiberius Claudius Nero.Romeins Imperium – Lucius Quintus Volusius Saturninus translated from Dutch to English As thus, she was a first cousin to Tiberius and his brother, Nero Claudius Drusus.After Actium: Two Caesars Are Not Enough: Chapter LXXXVII: The Trials of Livia Valeria
Through Volusia, Lollius was the father of two daughters:Genealogy of M. Lollius by D.C. O’DriscollMarcus Lollius’ article at Livius.org

==References==

==Sources==


