[[Never forget (political phrase)]]

CATEGORIES: Nationalism, Grief, Propaganda, Aftermath of the September 11 attacks, The Holocaust, Armenian Genocide, Genocide, Political slogans

"Never forget" is a political slogan used to urge commemoration and remembrance for national tragedies. These have included the September 11 attacks in the United States in 2001, the Holocaust in Europe during World War II,9/11: Forgive and Forget?“Never Forget” - 9/11 Encyclopedia - September 11 10th Anniversary – NYMag the Armenian Genocide of the 1910s,Armenian Genocide » Armenian Genocide 1915 Never Again! and other acts of genocide and mass murder. In 1962 Mao Tse Tung introduced the edict  "Never Forget the Class Struggle" at the Eighth Chinese Communist Assembly and it became a leading slogan of the Chinese Cultural Revolution of the 1960s.Xing Lu, Rhetoric of the Chinese Cultural Revolution: The Impact on Chinese Thought, Culture, and Communication, University of South Carolina Press, 2004, p 53.Eileen Tamura, China: Understanding Its Past, Volume 1, University of Hawaii Press, 1997, p 217. 
It is often used in conjunction with 'never again'.

==History of the term==

Though the exact phrase 'never forget' originated after the Holocaust, similar terms have been used in times before, including "lest we forget" at the end of the "Ode of Remembrance".
From the late 1940s to 2001, the phrase was used to protest genocide. While the main message of 'never forget' is to remember the past so history does not repeat its mistakes, it also arguably implies vengeance and militarism, especially after 9/11 when the term was used by supporters of the War on Terror.Memorialize Our Fallen Heroes | Operation Never Forget | veteranjournal.com
The phrase has been used by U.S. President George W. Bush Bush says U.S. will never forget Flight 93 | Reuters and by President Barack Obama.Obama to 9/11 firefighters: "When we say we will never forget, we mean what we say" - Political Hotsheet - CBS News
A variation of the phrase is used as a slogan of the Virginia Tech massacre of April 16, 2007. This variation, "neVer forgeT" uses the capital letters so that the phrase implies "never forget VT." VT is an abbreviation of the school's name.

==See also==

==References==

This slogan was created after the findings in At Auchwitz.

