[[Masjid Rahmaniya - Bhairahawa, Nepal]]

CATEGORIES: Islam in Nepal

==Masjid Rahmaniya==

The Jama Masjid commonly known as the Jama Masjid Rahmaniya, the oldest mosque in Rupandehi, Bhairahawa, Nepal. It is the largest and best known mosque in Rupandehi District of Nepal. It was copmpleted in 1950 AD (2007 BS). This is one of the oldest mosque in Nepal.

==Madarsa Arbiya Asharfiya Faizul Islam==

The oldest Islamic school of Nepal is Madarsa Arabiya Ahsariya Faizul Islam. It was established in 1950 AD (2007 BS). The present principal of this madarsha (Islamic School) is Hazrat Maulana Faizullah Asharfi. Altogether 200 students are studying at present time among them 20 students dakhila( in hostel). This is the only one Islamic School in this area which provide free Islamic education, food and accommodation to dakhila students. Subjects for students are Arabic, Farsi (Parsian), Urdu, English, Nepali, Mathematics, Science, Social Studies, Economic etc. Madarsha is also affiliated by the Government of Nepal. There are teachers for every subjects. All the teachers in Madarsa are qualified.

===The Madarsa Currently offers the following Islamic courses===

==Imam of the Mosque Rahmaniya==

The first Imam of the mosque rahmaniya is Hazrat Maulana Ishaq Shahab from Bankatwa, Uttar Pradesh (India) , second Imam is Master Maulvi Nasruddin Khan from Lar, (India) and then after Hazrat Maulana Faizullah Asharfih  is the present Imam since 1973 AD.

==Hazrat Maulana Faizullah Asharfih==

Mawlānā Faizullah Asharfih (Urdu: مولانا فضل الله; born in 1959 September 7, Monday) (also spelled Maulana Faizullah) is an Islamic scholar. His parents are Safat Ali Shahab and Sahrun Nisha from Saildah urph Kevaldah, tahsil Pharenda, Maharajganj Distt, Uttar Pradesh, India. He has passed Mawlawi Aalim from Khairabad, Ajamgarh, Uttar Pradesh, India and Dastar Band from Fakhrum Ulum in Balram Pur, Gonda, Uttar Pradesh, India. Hazrat Maulana Faizullah Asharfi is Imam since 1973 in Mosque Rahmaniya. At present he is principal in Madarsha Arabiya Asharfiya Faizul Islam.
Mawlawi (also spelled: Maulvi, Moulvi, and Mawlvi; Arabic: مولوی) is an honorific Islamic religious title given to Sunni Muslim religious scholars or Ulema preceding their names, similar to the titles Maulana, Mullah, or Shaykh. Mawlawi generally means highly-qualified Islamic scholar. Usually, a Maulvi would have completed full studies in a madrassa (Islamic school) or Darul Uloom (Islamic seminary). It is commonly used throughout the Persian- including Iran, Afghanistan, Central Asia, South Asia, South East Asia and East Africa. The word Mawlawi/Maulvi is derived from the Arabic word "Mawla", which means "master" or "lord".

==Ahle Sunnat Wa Jamat Anjuman Islamiya Committee==

Ahle Sunnat Wa Jamat Anjuman Islamiya Committee (Hindi:अहले सुन्नत व जमात अन्जुमन इस्लामिया कमिटी , Urdu:اہلسنت و جماعت انجمن اسلامیہ کمیٹی) is an Islamic Social Organization which was established by the local muslim people of Bhairahawa, Nepal during 1950. Later it was registered with local government in 1996 (2053 BS). The committee is established to help the Muslim society.  Ahle Sunnat Wa Jamat Anjuman Islamiya Committee is a group of 13 members. The present chairman of committee is Mr. Wasi Ahmad Dewan, all the members are elected by the local muslim peoples for their position. All members are responsible for their position. It is one of the oldest Islamic committee registered in local government in Nepal. Committee responsible for maintenance and management of the Jama Masjid Rahmaniya (Mosque Rahmaniya), Madarsa Arabiya Asharfiya Faizul Islam (Islamic school), Eid Gah Sharif, Karbala and Cemetery (Kabristan). General Mission of this committee is to provide better Islamic education to adult and children and orphan children, vocations education, computer education and training, Hostel facility for boys, welfare works, Da’wah of Deen Islam and Religious program, welfare program for care-taking of orphans, Financial assistance program, sanitation program, the iftar program etc.

==Gallery==

File:Minar Masjid Rahmaniya.jpg|Minarat of Masjid Rahmaniya
File:Sahe Alam Masjid Rahmaniya.JPG|At Eid-gah 2012 Sahe Alam, Abdul Sir and Irshad Ali
File:Eid-miladun Nabi Rely.jpg|Eid Miladun Nabi Rely in 2011, Bhairahawa, Bank Road
File:Masjid Rahmaniya inside.jpg|Masjid Rahmaniya Inside View 2011
File:Masjid Rahmaniya dome.jpg|Masjid Rahmaniya Entrance Dome 2011
File:Masjid Rahmaniya Students infron of masjid.JPG|Masjid Rahmaniya Students infront of masjid
File:Students Masjid Rahmaniya.jpg|Students at Madarsa Arabiya Ahsarfiya Faizul Islam Gallamandi-6, Bhairahawa, Nepal

==External links==


