[[Bay Garnett]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 births, British fashion designers, English fashion designers, Living people, Fashion stylists, Fashion editors

Bay Garnett is a British freelance fashion stylist, author and editor."Bay Garnett" The Huffington Post. Retrieved 30 July 2013."What's in Bay Garnett's make-up bag?" The Telegraph. Retrieved 6 August 2013."Up on the roof... Karl Lagerfeld's cocktail party to launch his Team Karl pop-up shop" The London Evening Standard. Retrieved 6 August 2013.
She pioneered the idea of "thrifting", the art of shopping in second-hand stores, as being relevant to high fashion by including items she had found in magazine shoots."Kate Moss Poses for Venetia Scott in Centrefold’s F/W 2012 Cover Shoot" Fashion Gone Rogue. Retrieved 30 July 2013. Her thrift-inspired work is credited with having made its way into mainstream fashion."Anatomy of a Trend - The Rise and Rise of the Banana Top" Huffington Post. Retrieved 13 August 2013.

==Background==

She is the daughter of Andy Garnett and Polly Devlin. Her mother, who received an OBE for service for Literature, worked at both British and American Vogue and wrote the Vogue Book of Fashion Photography."Polly Delvin" Barnard University. Retrieved 5 August 2013.

==Career==

After studying art history and modern history at the University of Exeter, Garnett gained initial experience in galleries such as the Peggy Guggenheim Collection in Venice, Pace Wildenstein in New York and working for photographic agency Art Department.
In 1997, she co-launched the New York version of underground, anti-fashion magazine Cheap Date, started in London in 1997 by Kira Jolliffe, which won them the title 'thrift pioneers'."Interview: Cheap Date" Oyster. Retrieved 30 July 2013. The magazine had contributors such as Anita Pallenberg, Chloe Sevigny, Liv Tyler and Debbie Harry. She is also the co-author of The Cheap Date Guide to Style."The close-up" The Guardian. Retrieved 30 July 2013.
From 2002 to 2004, she was Style Director for British designer Matthew Williamson, and continues to be a Contributing Fashion Editor for British Vogue and a consultant to Louis Vuitton amongst other projects."Exclusive Few Fab Words With Bay Garnett" PopSugar. Retrieved 28 July 2013. In 2004, she designed a limited edition range for Topshop and consulted for the label Chloé. While there, the Bay bag was developed and became one of its most successful bags."Kylie and Mischa do the Bay" WeWomen. Retrieved 6 August 2013.
Garnett has collaborated with photographers including Juergen Teller, Bruce Webber, Craig McDean, Nick Knight, David LaChapelle. She also worked on a digital film for Louis Vuitton with Sam Taylor-Johnson. Her work has been featured in various publications and print advertising including British Vogue, Italian Vogue, V Man, 25 Magazine, Selfridges, Centrefold Magazine, Lula Magazine, and Solange Azagury-Partridge."Bay Garnett" Models.com. Retrieved 5 August 2013."Yasmin Le Bon's Monsoon debut" Stylist. Retrieved 6 August 2013.
In 2013, Garnett took part in a joint exhibition with her partner, photographer Tom Craig (photographer), at the Vogue Festival in London."Louis Vuitton To Stage Vogue Festival Photography Exhibition" Vogue. Retrieved 30 July 2013."The Hot List: April Edition" Nouse. Retrieved 5 August 2013.

==Publications==

==References==

==External links==


