[[William Donati]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), Living people

William Donati is a biographer and academic. He holds four university degrees in literature, including a PhD in English. 
Donati gained national attention when he charged that author Charles Higham committed literary fraud in the with his book about actor Errol Flynn. Higham’s Errol Flynn: The Untold Story (Doubleday 1980) claimed that Flynn had been a spy for Germany and was involved in the bombing of Pearl Harbor. Donati investigated the controversy and accused Higham of altering a government surveillance document in the paperback version to make it appear that Flynn had been identified as a Nazi spy, as reported in the Los Angeles Times. “Shadows on a Legend” by Garry Abrams. Los Angeles Times, March 24, 1989.  Donati co-authored My Days With Errol Flynn (Roundtable 1988), the autobiography of stuntman Buster Wiles, Flynn’s close friend, and his research on Higham’s claims appears in a section of the book. Donati and Wiles were guests on Geraldo in a segment about Errol Flynn, Cary Grant, and Richard Burton.[tpl]citation needed |date=April 2014[/tpl] 
Donati is also the author of Ida Lupino: A Biography.William Donati. Ida Lupino: A Biography (University Press of Kentucky, 1996). The biography was recognized as a realistic account with documentation: “We have only to read on to see that so much of what led to an extraordinary career will be gnawed at by inner turmoil, alcohol and decades of being one’s own worst enemy.”“The Finest Trouper of All” by Lisa Mitchell. Director’s Guild of America Magazine,    Sep-Oct 1996
He also wrote Lucky Luciano: The Rise and Fall of a Mob Boss (McFarland 2010)  He examined over 40,000 archival documets, and presented “Lucky’s world of drugs, gambling, prostitution, and gang rival killings".“Recommended Reads for New York History Buffs.” Epoch Times, August 5, 2010.  The biography has a strong anti-gangster tone that criticized the underworld and praised special prosecutor Thomas E. Dewey.   
Donati's most recent[tpl]when|date=April 2014[/tpl] book is The Life and Death of Thelma Todd (McFarland 2012). Donati appeared in an episode of "Hollywood Mysteries and Scandals" in 1998 examining Todd’s 1935 death, which remains one of Hollywood’s most enduring unsolved mysteries.  Hot Toddy by Andy Edmonds asserted the actress had been murdered by Lucky Luciano, a claim Donati disputes.  Arts writer Thomas Gladysz listed it as one of the Best Film Books of 2012.“Best Film Books of 2012” by Thomas Gladysz. Huffington Post, December 27, 2012.

==References==


