[[Atilio Malinverno]]

CATEGORIES: Argentine painters, 1890 births, 1936 deaths

Atilio Malinverno  was an Argentine painter. He was a post-Impressionist, a part of a movement started in the first decade of the twentieth century.
With a solitary temperament, he devoted himself exclusively to landscape painting in his free time from working in his advertising agency. The main topics of his works are the hills of Cordoba, the Pampas plains, the mountains of Tandil, the coast of Quilmes, the "barrancas" of San Isidro and Piriapolis, in the República Oriental del Uruguay.
He moved with his easel towards Cordoba hills where he created works that later when he returned to Buenos Aires he successfully sold in art exhibitions.
He studied art at the "Asociación de Estímulo de Bellas Artes", and made several trips to study art in Argentina, Bolivia, Chile and Uruguay.

==Biography==

==His Work==

Landscape painter par excellence, Malinverno has painted the most suggestive beauties of Argentine trees and horizons. Painter of strength, vigorous, his landscapes are distinctive for their wide and loaded brushstrokes. A feature to note is that his paintings do not have any relationship with other Argentine artists of the genre, Malinverno has his own personality.
Native Landscape painting (the tree, the ranch, the hill, the plain) had in Malinverno a sincere and great performer who poured into the fabric all the freshness of a polychrome palette, infused with emotion Creole and aesthetic sense. Atilio Malinverno was a painter of truly Argentine soul, always attentive to the native contour sensory perception. His friends called him "Poeta del Árbol" (poet of the tree), as he was a poet of color and excitement that exuded on the canvas the image of eucalyptus or carob, infiltrating his own soul. Perhaps in his temperament simple man, lay the deep bathing pantheistic sense of serenity and melancholy ranches and taperas, solitary trees that Malinverno left something of their own child's heart.
His work is displayed at:

==References==

==External links==


