[[Gregg A. Mast]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, New Brunswick Theological Seminary, New Brunswick Theological Seminary alumni, Hope College alumni, Drew University alumni, Reformed Church in America ministers, Reformed Church in America Christians, Calvinist and Reformed ministers

The Reverend Gregg Alan Mast is a Reformed clergyman, scholar, and seminary president.  Mast is the author of six books on Christian practice and theology, and the editor of a collection of sermons by Reformed minister and theologian Howard G. Hageman
Since 2006, Mast has been the fourteenth president of the New Brunswick Theological Seminary located in New Brunswick, New Jersey in the United States—one of two seminaries affiliated with the Reformed Church in America.New Brunswick Theological Seminary. Faculty Directory: Gregg Alan Mast, President (curriculum vitae). Retrieved 13 August 2013.Reformed Church in America "News: NBTS Graduate Returns as President" (news release) (3 February 2006). Retrieved 13 August 2013. Mast oversees the seminary in a time of transition while it builds a new, smaller, "technologically smart and environmentally green" campus on College Avenue and Seminary Place in New Brunswick that should be completed in 2014.New Brunswick Theological Seminary. "Land Sale Will Further the Mission of NBTS" (press release) (21 May 2013). Retrieved 11 August 2013. This move—part of a large-scale redevelopment of the College Avenue area of New Brunswick by New Brunswick Development Corporation (DEVCO), Rutgers University and the seminary—was made in response to the seminary's declining enrollment, financial constraints and to replace an aging campus with a modern, environmentally-friendly campus.Development Department of New Brunswick Theological Seminary  "NBTS Departs 'Holy Hill' to Build a New Future on College Ave." in New Brunswick Theological Seminary Newsletter. Retrieved 11 August 2013.Kratovil, Charlie. "Planning Board Approves New Seminary Building For College Ave.: Six Buildings Will be Demolished to Build a New New Brunswick Theological Seminary" at New Brunswick Today (13 September 2012). Retrieved 12 August 2013.
In 1974, Mast earned a Bachelor of Arts (B.A.) degree majoring in religion from Hope College in Holland, Michigan.  Pursuing a vocation in the Christian ministry, he received a Master of Divinity (M.Div.) from the New Brunswick Theological Seminary and was ordained as a clergyman in the Reformed Church in America in 1976.  He earned a Master of Philosophy (M.Phil.) in 1981 and Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) in Liturgical Studies in 1985 from Drew University in Madison, New Jersey.  His doctoral dissertation was titled The Eucharistic Service of the Catholic Apostolic Church and Its Influence on Reformed Liturgical Renewals of the Nineteenth Century (1985) which was later published as a book in 1999.
Mast has served congregations in Johannesburg, South Africa, in Newark and Irvington in New Jersey, and Albany, New York. In addition to New Brunswick Theological Seminary, Mast has taught on the faculties of Westminster Choir College, Siena College, St. Bernard's Institute, and as a guest lecturer at the Nkhoma Theological Seminary in Malawi. He served as President of the General Synod of the Reformed Church in America from 1999-2000.

==Works==

==See also==

==References==


