[[Kenneth A. Bollen]]

CATEGORIES: American sociologists, American statisticians, 1951 births, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill faculty, Living people, Fellows of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Fellows of the American Statistical Association, ISI highly cited researchers

Kenneth A. Bollen (born 1951) is the Henry Rudolf Immerwahr Distinguished Professor of Sociology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. He is a fellow at the Carolina Population Center, the American Statistical Association and the American Association for the Advancement of Science. He was also the Director of the Odum Institute for Research in Social Science from 2000 to 2010. His specialties are population studies and cross-national analyses of democratization.
Bollen joined UNC-Chapel Hill in 1985.
He is the author of several books and over a hundred of papers. His best known publication, Structural Equations with Latent Variables, has been cited over 14,000 times, it integrated diverse literature from several disciplines to help define the area of structural equation modeling (SEMs).
According to the National Science Foundation, "His best known substantive research is on the measurement, determinants, and consequences of liberal democracy in nations. The research revealed conservative and liberal biases in democracy measures and provided new measures that minimized the bias. He and colleagues delivered the first empirical estimates of the effects of British colonial history, world system position, and religious traditions on democracy." The National Science Federation have Bollen on their Advisory Committee for Social, Behavioral & Economic Sciences.

==Honors and awards==

In 2011, he was an Elected Fellow of the American Statistical Association. For the period 2010-2012, he was Elected Chair, Chair, Past Chair of the Section on Social, Economic, and Political Sciences of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). In 2008, he was and Elected Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
In 2002, he was added to the ISI Highly Cited database of "highly cited researchers" in the Social Sciences category. as well as being recognized by a Reuters list.
In 2000 he was the recipient of the Lazarsfeld Award for Methodological Contributions in Sociology, the highest award
for methodologists given by the American Sociological Association.

==References==

==External links==


