[[Isle of Man Film Festival]]

CATEGORIES: Film festivals in the United Kingdom, Festivals on the Isle of Man

==History==

The Isle of Man Government's Arts Council created the event in 2006, focusing mainly on the Young Filmmaker of Mann competition and outdoor cinema held at The Nunnery, Douglas.
In 2012 the format for the event changed with the Isle of Man Film Festival being run by local company MannIn Shorts supported by the Isle of Man Arts Council.

==2013 Festival==

The second Isle of Man Film Festival ran from 11–15 September 2013. The programme of events was:
11 September: Preview screening of the debut feature by Manx-born independent film maker Andrew Blackburn.
12 September: Future Shorts Fringe Night. A reel of award winning short films from across the globe, created by Future Shorts, founded by Manxman Fabien Riggall who has since gone on to create the 'Secret Cinema'. The reel was screened at three boutique cinemas across the Island, all on the same night.
13 September: The Disappearance of Alice Creed at Broadway Cinema.
Thriller starring Gemma Arterton and Eddie Marsan, shot on the Island in 2009. Introduced by film critic Mark Kermode, including a Q&A session with writer/director J Blakeson.
14 and 15 September: The Guerilla Filmmakers Masterclass: Guerilla Films' Chris Jones hosted a filmmakers' workshop.
14 September: Isle of Man Arts Council's Young Filmmaker of Mann. Afternoon session, Broadway Cinema.
14 September: MannIN Shorts Presents... Homegrown Mini Movies!  Screenings and prize presentation of winning films from the open Festival Competition. Exclusive first screenings of short films made within the Isle of Man training scheme over the past year; including 'Closet', 'Solace in Wicca' and 'Barry Brown'. 2013 saw the introduction of two new categories under the themes of "Island Life" and "Music Moves". The 'Best of the Fest' film, as chosen by the festival judges headed by Mark Kermode, was also shown.
15 September: Life in the Film Industry. Actor, producer and chairman of Distrify Wilkinson and Guerilla Films co-founder and London Screenwriters Festival Director Chris Jones, talked about their lives in the industry with Leeds-based filmmaker and former Radio Aire presenter Danny Lacey.

