[[John J. McNulty, III]]

CATEGORIES: The Pentagon, American military personnel of the Gulf War, American military personnel of the Vietnam War, United States Army Command and General Staff College alumni

Colonel John Joseph “Jay” McNulty, III was Chief of the House Liaison Division of the Office of the Chief Legislative Liaison (United States Army) U.S. Secretary of the Army at The Pentagon. Prior to closing his 29 years of service in the U.S. Army by serving, finally, in this sensitive position, Col. Jay McNulty was both an Army Vietnam War mechanized cavalry combat commander serving first with the 11th Armored Cavalry Division (Black Horse Regiment) and, later, with the 1st Cavalry Regiment (United States) (1st U.S. Dragoons) (Blackhawks), and, also, in peacetime, an Army commander of the 1st Squadron, 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment, Ft. Bliss, Texas. McNulty was a 1981 centennial class graduate of the United States Army Command and General Staff College.
The House Liaison Division is the only special division of the U.S. Secretary of Army’s Office of the Chief Legislative Liaison. Of the two oversight branches of the U.S. Congress, the U.S. Senate and the U.S. House, the United States House of Representatives is of unique importance to the U.S. Army and the U.S. Executive Branch, because, uniquely, only it of the two branches of the Congress can originate funding legislation.  From 1989-1995, McNulty served in this critical and sensitive position of explaining often classified information on the funding needs of the Army to U.S. Representatives,  conveying often also classified details of the Army’s operations and intended operations to them and advising the Army on critical major activities of the House, that is during the period of two U.S. presidencies and throughout the entirety of both the Gulf War and United Nations’ sanctioned U.S. provision of security and humanitarian aid for victims in the Somali Civil War during Operation Restore Hope and its occurrence of the Battle of Mogadishu (1993). 
U.S. Representative Ike Skelton (D) stated of the Colonel’s tenure as Chief of the House Liaison Division of the Office of the Chief Legislative Liaison “He effectively used his vast knowledge of the Army, his personal communication skills, and his management abilities to tell the “Army Story”. He represented the Army, continuing his role of resolving complex and sensitive issues with every professional committee, and all 435 personal offices, and leadership offices in the U.S. House of Representatives. ... He has served our Nation well."Congressional Record Volume 141, Number 116 (Tuesday, July 18, 1995) Page E1460

==References==


