[[Llanmerewig]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Powys, History of Powys, History of Montgomeryshire, Historic Montgomeryshire Parishes

Llanmerewig is a historic parish in Powys, in the former county of Montgomeryshire,  and is situated between Newtown and Welshpool. The church and small village stand on high ground, which overlooks the river Severn, and is close to Abermule; part of which lies within the parish.Gibbings Rev. R and Jones B, 'A History of the Parish of Llanmerewig', Montgomeryshire Collections, XXXV, 1908-10, pp 110-5 The river Severn forms the North Western boundary of the parish  and the Eastern boundary is the river Mule, which cuts through a steep gorge, before entering the Severn at Abermule. The historic parish covered 1,023 acres.

==Neighbouring Settlements==

==The Celtic Saint St Llwchaiarn  and his association with Llanmerewig==

The Church is dedicated to the 6th century saint Llwchaiarn, who was also the patron saint of the adjacent Llanllwchaearn and of two parishes in Ceredigion. The placename presents a problem as it would be expected that the “Llan’‘ (Welsh: a Church enclosure), would proceed the recognisable name of a patron saint, but this is not the case. The most likely explanation is that the place-name has been corrupted from  ‘‘Lam-yr-ewig’’. or in English the “Hind’s Leap”.Bartrum P C  “A Welsh Classical Dictionary” National Library of Wales, 1993, 419Baring-Gould S and Fisher J “Lives of the British Saints” 4vols, London 1907-13. The 16th century Welsh poet, Sion Keri uses the name “Lamerewig’‘ as the placename and describes the various feats and miracles attributed to the saint which include slaying a dragon and causing a hind to leap into a pool of water.

==The Church==

Located on a lane 400m N of Llanmerewig village to the east of Church Farm. The church is situated in an oval churchyard (typical of a “llan’’ enclosure) bounded by a masonry wall.jura.rcahms.gov.uk/cadw/cadw-eng.php?id=17008 The medieval church has largely disappeared as church underwent major alterations on two occasions in the C19.  The first alterations were undertaken from 1839 to 1843 by the rector, John Parker (1798-1860), an enthusiastic advocate of the Gothic style. The present  curiously slender tower and a semi-dormer window on the S side were added at this time, and the porch was richly ornamented. The second series of restorations took place in 1892 and were more conventional in style; plans were prepared by Sir Aston Webb and the work was funded by Charles Whitley Owen of Fronfraith Hall. The E and N walls were rebuilt, and a new E window was built to match the old Medieval window which was removed to the E boundary wall of the churchyard, where it remains.. A fragment of the 15th century Rood Screen survives in the reconstructed screen of 1892.

==Administrative History==

In the Medieval period Llanmerewig was in the Commote of Cedewain in the Kingdom of Powys. Llanmerewig appears to have consisted of only one or two townships, Llanmerewig itself and Cilgwrgan; which in the Medieval period may  have been a township. In 1885, the township of Bolbro, which was previously in Llandyssil parish, was transferred to Llanmerewig. For ecclesiastical administration the parish is in the Diocese of St Asaph, the Archdeaconry of Montgomeryand the Deanery of Cedewain. In 1974, as a result of Local Government reform, Llanmerewig was joined with  Llandyssil Parish Council to become  a Community Council within the new Montgomeryshire District Council. In 1984 the Community Council was renamed Abermule with Llandyssil Community Council. At this time, the Community Council covered the old parishes of Llanmerewig and Llandyssil, to-gether with Dolforwyn, which had been a township in Bettws Cedewain parish.English E (ed) 1999 "A Collected History of the Communities of Llandyssil, Abermule and Llanmerewig" In 1996, with the abolition of the Montgomeryshire District Council, the Community Council became part of the Powys County Council unitary authority.

==References==


