</ref> Chrétien made it clear that the 3% deficit to GDP ratio would apply only to the federal government, whereas the [[Maastricht Treaty]] of 1991 which set out the 3% deficit to GDP ratio in order to enter the European Union stated that this applied to all levels of government.<ref name="Grady" /> The Red Book went on to promise that that a Liberal government would achieve its goal of reducing the deficit to 3% of the GDP by cancelling the contract to buy the Sea King helicopters and to privatise Pearson airport in Toronto and by eliminating unspecifed "waste" in the government. After the 3% target had achieved within the first three years of taking office, the Red Book promised that the deficit would be eliminated at some unspecified time in the future. Martin, who had been the leader of the team that had produced the Red Book had wanted to promise to eliminate the deficit altogether, but had been overruled by Chrétien, who had wanted to present the Liberals as the "caring" party that would defend social programs, unlike the "heartless" Tories and the Reform Party who Chrétien claimed wanted to eliminate the deficit within two or three years by gutting social programs with no thought for any suffering that this might cause.<ref>Martin, Lawrence ''Iron Man'' Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 60-62.</ref> Chrétien claimed in his campaign speeches that Reform's plans for eliminate the deficit within two or three years of taking office would cause at least a 25% unemployment rate, if not higher, which Chrétien claimed starkly in a series of speeches would cause a bloody "revolution".<ref>Martin, Lawrence ''Iron Man'' Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 62.</ref> Chrétien had personally chosen the target of reducing the deficit to 3% of GDP as it made the Liberals seemed fiscally responsible while at the same time promised that the Liberals would not inflict too much economic pain to achieve that fiscal responsibility.<ref name="Grady" /> One Liberal candidate [[Herb Dhaliwal]] recalled that for Chrétien at time of the 1993 election that the national deficit was not a major issue and that "His attitude was that the deficit is ok as long as you can manage it".<ref>Martin, Lawrence ''Iron Man'', Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 62</ref> To support its economic claims, the Red Book gave costs for each of the Liberals' policy goals[tpl]spaced ndash[/tpl]the first time a Canadian party had gone to such lengths to prove that its proposals were fiscally responsible.
During the 1993 election campaign, Chrétien criticized the Conservative government for planning to spend $5.8 billion to replace the Canadian Forces' aging fleet of Labrador and Sea King helicopters.  The aircraft were used for maritime surveillance, search and rescue and anti-submarine warfare operations.  The helicopters were 20 to 30 years old, typically required 30 hours of maintenance for every hour in the air, were frequently grounded for repairs and required many expensive custom-made parts for their obsolete machinery.  The government's announced choice of the EH-101 was derided by Chrétien as an overly-expensive "Cadillac" aircraft.
By late September 1993, the Liberals quickly surged to a double-digit lead in most opinion polls in large part because of the Red Book. By October, it was obvious that the Liberals would win at least a minority government. Even at this stage, however, Chrétien's personal approval ratings were far behind those of Campbell. Realizing this, the Tory campaign team released a series of ads attacking Chrétien. The ads were viewed as a last-ditch effort to keep the Liberals from winning a majority.  The second ad, released on October 14, appeared to mock Chrétien's facial paralysis, and generated a severe backlash from all sides. Even some Tory candidates called for the ad to be yanked. Campbell was not directly responsible for the ad, and ordered it off the air over her staff's objections. However, she did not apologize and lost a chance to contain the fallout from the ad.
Chrétien, taking advantage of the furor, likened the Tories to the children who teased him when he was a boy in Shawinigan.  "When I was a kid people were laughing at me," he said at an appearance in Nova Scotia. "But I accepted that because God gave me other qualities and I'm grateful." The speech, which one Tory described as one Chrétien had waited his whole life to deliver, moved many in the audience to tears. Chrétien's approval ratings shot up, nullifying the only advantage the Tories still had over him.
On October 25, the Liberals were elected to a strong majority government, winning 177 seats[tpl]spaced ndash[/tpl]the third-best performance in the Liberals' history, and their most impressive win since their record of 190 seats in 1949. The Tories were nearly wiped out, winning only two seats in the worst defeat ever suffered by a governing party at the federal level. Chrétien himself yielded Beauséjour back to Robichaud in order to run in his old riding, Saint-Maurice. However, he was unable to lead the Liberals back to their traditional dominance in Quebec. He was one of only four Liberal MPs elected from that province outside the Montreal area.  With few exceptions, most of the support that had switched from the Liberals to the Tories nine years earlier flowed to the Bloc, which became the Official Opposition.

===First parliament as prime minister===

On November 4, 1993, Chrétien was appointed by Governor General Ray Hnatyshyn as prime minister. While Trudeau, Joe Clark and Mulroney had been relative political outsiders prior to becoming prime minister, Chrétien had served in every Liberal cabinet since 1965. This experience gave him knowledge of the Canadian parliamentary system, and allowed Chrétien to establish a very centralized government that, although highly efficient, was also lambasted by critics such as Jeffrey Simpson and the media as being a "friendly dictatorship" and intolerant of internal dissent.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Tornoto: Viking, 2003 pages 283-284 The political scientist Donald Savoie wrote that under Chrétien's authoritarian style of leadership that "Cabinet has now joined Parliament as an institution being by-passed" while Simpson wrote that Chrétien possessed " a streak of terrible pettiness and vengeance directed against those who have crossed him".Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Tornoto: Viking, 2003 page 283 Reflecting the relative impotence of Parliament, the most powerful advisors to Chrétien were a triumvirate comprising his wife Aline, his Chief of Staff Jean Pelletier and his right-hand man Eddie Goldenberg, none of whom held a seat in the House of Commons.Allan Fotheringham, "Aline, the power player," Maclean's, December 11, 2000, vol. 113, issue 50, p. 68 Chrétien liked to present himself as the heir to Trudeau, but his governing style had little in common with the intense bouts of governmental activism that had characterised the Trudeau era. The Chrétien government had a cautious, managerial approach to governing, reacting to issues as they aroused, and was otherwise inclined to inactivity.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 97. The most common critique of the Chrétien government, especially in its first 15 months or so from late 1993 to early 1995 was that the government had been "sleepwalking".
Immediately upon taking office in 1993, Chrétien cancelled the contract to buy the Sea King helicopters and paid a $157.8 million termination fee to AgustaWestland.New York Times, January 24, 1996, http://www.nytimes.com/1996/01/24/business/international-briefs-canada-settles-claim-on-canceled-helicopters.html Additionally, Chrétien kept his Red Book promise of spending $6 billion on infrastructure to stimulate the economy out of recession by signing the necessary orders, and to cancel the privatization of Pearson airport.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 76 & 161-162 The consortium that was due to take ownership of Pearson sued for breach of contract, which led the government to settle out of court in April 1997 for $60 million in damages.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 163 Chrétien phoned President Bill Clinton of the United States in November 1993 to ask him to renegotiate aspects of NAFTA.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 79 Clinton bluntly refused, saying that it had extremely difficult to get Congress to ratify NAFTA, and if NAFTA was renegotiated, then he would to submit the renegotiated treaty again for ratification, which was not something that he was going to do just for the sake of Chrétien. Clinton informed the Prime Minister that he either scrap NAFTA or accept it as it was, and at most he could offer were a few cosmetic concessions like writing a letter saying the United States was not interested in taking over Canada's energy and water. Chrétien chose the latter, and sought to portray Clinton's letter as a major American concession that constituted a renegotiated NAFTA, through in fact Clinton's letter was not legally binding and meant nothing.
A major issue for the first Chrétien government was the large national debt that had been inherited from the Trudeau and Mulroney eras. One of Chrétien's first acts had been to fulfill his Red Book promise to fire on 1 February 1994 the very unpopular Bank of Canada governor John Crow, who was replaced with Gordon Thiessen.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 266. Crow's policy of high interest rates in the early 1990s to achieve 0% inflation had made him almost as unpopular as the GST, indeed so unpopular that Chrétien had promised to fire him if he should become prime minister. Despite the Red Book promise, Chrétien who was fearful of the market reaction if he should sack the Bank of Canada governor sent the new finance minister Paul Martin to meet with Crow in December 1993 to tell him that he could remain as governor provided that he was willing to forego his 0% inflation target and end the punishingly high interest rates, which Chrétien believed to be a major cause of the recession.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 81 Crow told Martin that the government should mind its own business, at which point Chrétien decided to keep his Red Book promise. Crow was one of the few people from the Mulroney era sacked by Chrétien. An important debate that took within the Chrétien government upon taking office was to what with the deputy ministers left-over from the Mulroney era, many  of whom were Conservatives holding patronage positions within the bureaucracy.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 page 244. Many Liberals wanted a purge of all civil servants associated with the PCs, but Chrétien's aide David Zussman successfully convinced Chrétien that such a purge would be counter-productive, arguing that it would demoralize the civil service as it would led to fears that Chrétien was planning on firing all the civil servants who served under Mulroney. Instead, Chrétien summoned all of the deputy ministers to inform them that there would be no purge, but that anyone who did anything that might threatened the Liberals' chance of re-election would be sacked. Because deputy ministers often knew their portfolios considerably better than the ministers in charge did, there were subtle bureaucratic forces pushing the Chrétien government to the right. In February–March 1994, detailed reports from the Canadian embassy in Kigali meant that the Canadian government was one of the best informed nations in the world about the coming Rwandan genocide.[ref]
