</ref> In order to silence objections from left-wing Liberal backbenchers and Cabinet ministers, Chrétien ensured that the Program Review Committee chaired by [[Marcel Massé]] that would decide what programs to end and which to cut had a majority comprising the leftist MPs [[Brian Tobin]], [[Sheila Copps]], [[Sergio Marchi]] and [[Herb Gray]], people who would not normally supporting cutting programs, and thereby underlined the seriousness of the crisis.<ref>Jeffrey, Brooke ''Divided Loyalties'' Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, pages 267-268.</ref> It was only with the budget that Martin introduced on 27 February 1995 that the Chrétien government began a policy of cuts designed to eliminate the deficit in order to reassure the markets.<ref>Martin, Lawrence ''Iron Man'', Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 103.</ref>
Through Chrétien had supported Martin in his plans for cuts, he did not allow Martin to go as far as he would have liked with cutting various social programs and to devolve spending powers to the provinces as a way of cutting federal government expenditure.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, pages 271-272 As a "hard federalist", Chrétien fiercely objected to what he saw as the "soft federalist" Martin's attempts to weaken the power of the federal government under the guise of cutting the deficit.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 272. One senior Liberal later recalled about the Chrétien-Martin debate about reforming Old Age Security that:  "Martin had been told "no" by the prime minister three times and still he persisted...his insubordination was unprecedented. It got the point where Chrétien had to draw a line in the sand and say "I'm the prime minister and you're the finance minister and I'm saying no!"".Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 271.  Much of the Liberal caucus was deeply unhappy with the 1995 budget, arguing that this was not what they had been elected for in 1993, only to informed by the Prime Minister that there was no alternative.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 108 Chrétien himself expressed his unhappiness with his budget in a radio interview with Peter Gzowski in March 1995, saying about the budget: "It is not our pleasure sir, I have to tell you that. I've been around a long time. It's no pleasure at all. I'm not doctrinaire, a right-winger. I'm a Liberal, and I feel like a Liberal, and it is painful. But it is needed".
The government began a program of deep cuts to provincial transfers and other areas of government finance. During his tenure as prime minister a $42 billion deficit was eliminated, five consecutive budget surpluses were recorded (thanks in part to favorable economic times), $36 billion in debt was paid down, and taxes were cut by $100 billion (cumulatively) over five years.[tpl]cite web |url=http://www.fin.gc.ca/toce/2000/update01-1e.html|title=January 2001 Tax Savings |accessdate=2008-02-13 |archiveurl = http://web.archive.org/web/20080108171644/http://www.fin.gc.ca/toce/2000/update01-1e.html  |archivedate =2008-01-08[/tpl][tpl]cite web | url=http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.com/index.cfm?PgNm=TCE&Params=A1ARTA0001606 | title=Chrétien, Joseph-Jacques-Jean | publisher=The Canadian Encyclopedia | accessdate=2011-05-18 | author=Bothwell, Robert[/tpl] The 1995 budget, which was called by Peter C. Newman a "watershed document" that marked the first time in recent memory that anybody had made a serious effort to deal with the deficit, won a favorable reaction from the international markets, and a led to immediate fall in interest rates.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 103-104. There were, however, undeniable costs associated with this endeavour. The cuts resulted in fewer government services, most noticeably in the health care sector, as major reductions in federal funding to the provinces meant significant cuts in service delivery. Moreover, the across-the-board cuts affected the operations and achievement of the mandate of most federal departments. Many of the cuts were restored in later years of Chrétien's period in office.[tpl]Citation needed|date=January 2010[/tpl] Also in February 1995 the Canadian Airborne Regiment was disbanded following racist hazing videos shot in 1992 coming to light.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 158. Two months later, the Defense Minister David Collenette ordered a long-running inquiry into murder and other human rights abuses committed by the Airborne Regiment while serving in Somalia in 1993 that came to be known as the Somalia Affair.
One of Chrétien's main focuses in office was preventing the separation of the province of Quebec, which was ruled by the sovereigntist Parti Québécois for nearly the Prime Minister's entire term. In September 1995, when the 1995 referendum began, Chrétien was relaxed and assured about victory as the polls showed that the federalist forces were leading by a wide margin.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 278 Relations between the federal government and chairman of the no committee, the "soft federalist" Quebec Liberal Daniel Johnson were not very good with non committee co-chairwoman Liza Frulla openly saying that Chrétien was not wanted at non campaign events, but Chrétien argued with Parizeau leading the yes committee that this did not matter.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, pages 274 & 278 On 8 October 1995, the charismatic Lucien Bouchard replaced Parizeau as the de facto chairman of the oui committee, and at that point, the support for the yes side started to dramatically increase, aided by the complacency of the no committee who had taken victory for granted.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, pages 278-279 Unlike the "hard separatist" Parizeau for whom nothing less than a totally independent Quebec republic would have sufficed, the "soft separatist" Bouchard argued for sovereignty association, which turned out to be more appealing vision of the future to many Québécois than Parizeau's vision. For Chrétien, the replacement of Parizeau with Bouchard was a sign of weakness, and it was only as October went on did he realized that Bouchard was a much more formidable opponent than was Parizeau.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 121. Several of Chrétien's ministers such as David Collenette, Sheila Copps and Brian Tobin accused Chrétien of complacency, telling the Prime Minister at a Cabinet meeting that he "needed to get off his ass or we're going to lose the country".Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 126.
Furthermore, the referendum had re-opened the old feud between Chrétien and Martin with Chrétien taking the view that the "soft federalist" Martin simply could not be trusted on national unity because he was "soft on nationalists" and "too eager to grant concessions to the provinces".Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 280 In the weeks leading to the referendum on 30 October 1995, the federal government was seized with fear and panic as polls showing that under the leadership of Bouchard, the oui side was going to win.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 126-128 Further contributing to the demoralization of the no side was the open split that emerged when the chairman of the non committee, the "soft federalist" Daniel Johnson asked for the federal government to pass a constitutional amendment recognizing Quebec as a "distinct society", a request that the "hard federalist" Chrétien flatly rejected.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 126 To assist the work of the no committee, Chrétien sent over some of his staffers from the PMO such as Dominic LeBlanc and Jean Carle to work on the non committee in Montreal.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking page 124. The federal Liberals from the PMO recalled that the Quebec Liberals on the non committee decidedly made them feel unwelcome and unwanted. Chrétien's Chief of Staff Jean Pelletier recalled: "Relations were not good. We were frustrated, you know...And even the federal Liberals from Quebec were not welcome by the provincial Liberals, which I think is nuts".
With the federalist forces in open disarray and the polls showing that the yes side was going to win, Fisheries Minister Brian Tobin suggested organizing a gigantic "unity rally" in Montreal.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 127 Most of the Cabinet was opposed to Tobin's idea, but Chrétien decided to support the rally, telling Tobin at the Cabinet meeting "Brian-Go!" Chrétien's chief of staff Jean Pelletier later recalled that "We muscled in" on leading the no forces as Johnson, the nominal leader of the no committee was considered to be an inept leader who would lose the referendum on his own. Facing defeat, Chrétien did an U-turn on the question of a "distinct society", saying in a speech on 24 October in Verdun that the federal government was now open to the idea of recognizing Quebec as a "distinct society" in the constitution.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 128. In a speech before the Liberal caucus on 25 October, Chrétien acknowledged openly the possibility of defeat, and lashed out at the Quebec media whom he accused of pushing "a big pile of shit" that was allowing the yes side to win people over, and suggested that he might resign if the oui side won.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 129. On October 26, 1995, Montreal radio station disk jockey Pierre Brassard telephoned Queen Elizabeth II pretending to be Chrétien; he discussed the pending referendum, but also rambled about odd subjects, such as what the Queen would be wearing for Halloween and placing her effigy on Canadian Tire money. The Queen later said to Chrétien: "I didn't think you sounded quite like yourself, but I thought, given all the duress you were under, you might have been drunk."[tpl]citation| url=http://www.thestar.com/news/canada/article/1193874--when-the-queen-is-your-boss| last=Delacourt| first=Susan| title=When the Queen is your boss| date=May 25, 2012| newspaper=Toronto Star| accessdate=2012-05-27[/tpl] The result of Tobin's efforts was the Unity Rally of 27 October 1995, when 100,000 people showed up.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 132-133 On the night of the referendum, the prospect of a victory for the yes side was considered to be so realistic that Defense Minister David Collenette ordered the military to begin contingency plans to defend federal property in Quebec from a separatist take-over should the yes side prevail.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 134. On 30 October 1995, the federalist no side won by the narrowest of margins. Chrétien blamed the narrow victory on the Quebec Liberals under Johnson, whom he claimed had betrayed him, and argued the federalists would had done much better if only he had intervened in the referendum earlier, and presented the no case in terms of Trudeau-style "hard federalism" instead of the "soft federalist" no case presented by Johnson, which depicted the benefits of Confederation in purely economic terms, and had a strongly nationalist, albeit federalist tone of language.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 283
In the aftermath of the narrow victory in the referendum, Chrétien started in late 1995 a new policy of "tough love", also known as "Plan B", where the federal government sought to discredit Quebec separatism by making it clear to the people of Quebec how difficult it would be leave Canada.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, pages 284-286. Through Chrétien had promised to enshrine recognition of Quebec as a "distinct society" in the constitution in order to win the referendum, this promise was quickly forgotten in the aftermath of victory with Chrétien arguing that the very vocal opposition of Ontario Premier Mike Harris to amending the constitution to recognize Quebec as a "distinct society" made that impossible.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 284 Instead Chrétien had Parliament pass a resolution recognizing Quebec as a "distinct society", which had no constitutional force and was only a symbolic step. Through Harris's promise to veto any sort of "distinct society" clause in the constitution made fulfilling Chrétien's commitment to put such a clause into the constitution impossible, Chrétien did not seem to champion the idea of a "distinct society" clause with any great conviction.
On November 5, 1995, Chrétien and his wife escaped injury when André Dallaire, armed with a knife, broke in the Prime Minister's official residence at 24 Sussex Drive. Aline Chrétien shut and locked the bedroom door until security came, while Chrétien held a stone Inuit carving in readiness.[tpl]cite news|url=http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.com/index.cfm?PgNm=TCE&Params=M1ARTM0010953|title=Chrétien Attacker Found Guilty|last=Fisher|first=Luke|date=1996-07-08|publisher=Maclean's|accessdate=2012-11-05[/tpl] In November 1995, the long-running Airbus affair hit the headlines. On the 18 November 1995, a leaked letter appeared in the Financial Post where the Justice Ministry headed by Allan Rock asked Swiss authorities to investigate certain bank accounts alleged to be held by the former Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and former Newfoundland Premier Frank Moores where the proceeds of an alleged kickback scheme relating to the purchase of Airbus jets by the Mulroney government in 1988 had been stored.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 149. Mulroney sued for libel on 23 November 1995, claiming that the PMO had the letter leaked in order to distract attention from the near-defeat in the Quebec referendum, and asked for $50 million in damages.
In early 1996, the federal government launched an advertising program to increase the presence of Canada in Quebec, a policy that Chrétien believed would avoid a repeat of the near-defeat of 1995, and was to lead eventually to the Sponsorship scandal.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 287 On February 15, 1996, Chrétien was confronted by a protester, Bill Clennett, during a walkabout in Hull, Quebec. The prime minister responded with a choke-hold. The press referred to it as the "Shawinigan Handshake" (from the name of his home town).[tpl]cite news|url=http://archives.cnn.com/2001/WORLD/europe/05/17/politics.fights/index.html |title=CNN World Mar 2001 "Prescott not the only leader to pack a punch" |publisher=Archives.cnn.com |date=May 18, 2001 |accessdate=2010-04-20[/tpl] In March 1996, when the Chrétien government presented its third budget, the backbencher Liberal M.P. John Nunziata voted against the budget under the grounds it failed to repeal the GST as the Liberals had promised in 1993 and singled out for criticism his former Rat Pack colleague Sheila Copps who had promised during the 1993 election to resign within a year if the GST was not repealed.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 156. Chrétien's response was to expel Nunziata from the Liberal caucus. However, the expulsion of Nunziata drew attention to the fact that Copps was still in office despite her promise to resign within a year if the GST was not repealed. Chrétien first stated that Copps would stay in Parliament despite her promise of 1993, but then intense public pressure (together with a poll showing Copps would win a by-election) forced Copps to resign from the Parliament. After resigning, Copps then contested the resulting by-election, where she won and then went straight back into the Cabinet. To help defuse anger over the GST issue, in the spring of 1996 the Chrétien government moved swiftly to achieve its Red Book promise of harmonizing the GST with provincial sales taxes by signing an accord with three of the four Atlantic provinces creating a Harmonized Sales Tax; the other provinces were not interested in the federal offer to harmonize their sales taxes.
In the spring of 1996, the Somalia inquiry had discovered evidence of a widespread cover-up of the murder of a Somali by the Airborne Regiment in 1993. Through the events that the inquiry was examining took place in the last days of the Mulroney government, many of the civil servants and officers involved were still serving in 1996. At time of the killing of the Somali teenager Shidane Arone in March 1993 the long-serving Deputy Defense minister Robert Fowler issued a memo saying that nothing must come to light that would embarrass the Defense Minister Kim Campbell. Fowler went on to serve as a senior diplomat under Chrétien. Chrétien made little secret of his annoyance with the Somalia inquiry, stating that inquiry was treating civil servants "as if they were almost criminals" and that the inquiry was taking too long as "Even the Watergate was settled in six or seven weeks in the United States" (the Watergate inquiry actually took 20 weeks).  Later in 1996, Chrétien delivered a speech before a group of high school students, where he claimed to have regularly met with a homeless man in an Ottawa park to seek his advice, which he often took.[ref]
</ref>  At that point, journalists sought to find Chrétien's homeless advisor in the park, and could find no trace of any such person existing, which led Chrétien to admit that he not met with anybody homeless since becoming Prime Minister in 1993.<ref name="Wilson-Smith" />
After the 1995 referendum very narrowly defeated a proposal on Quebec sovereignty, Chrétien started to champion what eventually become the Clarity Act as part of his "Plan B". In August 1996, the lawyer Guy Bertrand won a ruling in a Quebec court declaring that the sovereignty question was not just a political matter between Quebec City and Ottawa, but also a legal matter which was subjected to the rulings of the courts.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 165. Following that ruling, Chrétien decided that here was a means of defeating the Quebec sovereignty movement, and in September 1996, ordered the Justice Minister Allan Rock to take this question of the precise legality of Quebec separating to the Supreme Court. Stéphane Dion advised Chrétien that if the federal government won the reference to the Supreme Court as expected, that the government should then draft a bill that stated what were the precise rules for Quebec to leave, telling the Prime Minister if the people of Quebec could be shown how difficult it would be to leave, then support for separatism would fall.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 166. Along the same lines, Dion started to send much publicised open letters to Quebec ministers questioning the assumptions behind the separatist case.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 167. The new policy of "Plan B" towards Quebec created much tension within the Cabinet with the "soft federalist" fraction led by Martin opposing the "Plan B" policy, especially the Clarity Act, and instead preferred a new Meech Lake-like constitutional deal while the "hard federalist" fraction led by Chrétien championed the new policy of confronting the Bouchard government and were against any concessions on the constitution. The "hard federalist"  Chrétien fraction took to disparagingly referring to the "soft federalist" Martin fraction as "the appeasers".
In October 1996, the long-running Somalia inquiry claimed a prominent victim when General Jean Boyle was forced to resign as Chief of the Defense Staff allowing allegations that he attempted to stymie the work of the inquiry and he had committed perjury when he testified before the inquiry about his role in the alleged Somalia cover-up of 1993.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 159. That same month, David Collenette, whose position was widely seen as untenable after Boyle's resignation given that he had personally selected Boyle, resigned as Defense Minister, ostensibly because of a minor violation of the ethics rules, to be replaced with Doug Young. Young frankly admitted in an interview in late 1996 he "certainly wouldn't want to be in an election campaign with the inquiry still going on".Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 160. In early 1997, Young ordered the inquiry to be shut down despite the complaints from the commissioners that their work was far from done. This marked the effective end of the Somalia Affair. Speaking about the shut-down of the inquiry, one of the commissioner Peter Desbarats said: "The fact that Chrétien was willing to tamper with something like an independent inquiry for the sake of what appeared to be minuscule political advantage, I just thought, Wow, if he'll do that, he'll do anything."Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 161. Desbarats stated that he once been a fan of Chrétien, but the shut-down of the Somalia inquiry "changed the way I look at him totally".
Chrétien called an early election in the spring of 1997, hoping to take advantage of his position in the public opinion polls and the continued division of the conservative vote between the PC Party and the upstart Reform Party of Canada. Despite slipping poll numbers, he advised the Governor General to call an election in 1997, a year ahead of schedule. Many of his own MPs criticized him for this move, especially in light of the devastating Red River Flood, which led to charges of insensitivity. The Liberal MP John Godfrey tried hard to interest Chrétien in an ambitious plan to eliminate urban poverty in Canada as a platform to run on in the election, which was vetoed by Eddie Goldenberg and John Rae of the PMO, who convinced Chrétien that it was better to stick with an "incrementalist" course of small changes than risk any grand project.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 176 The Progressive Conservatives had a popular new leader in Jean Charest and the New Democrats' Alexa McDonough led her party to a breakthrough in Atlantic Canada, where the Liberals had won all but one seat in 1993. In 1997, the Liberals lost all but a handful of seats in Atlantic Canada and Western Canada, but managed to retain a bare majority government due to their continued dominance of Ontario.

===Second parliament as prime minister===

Chrétien was involved in a controversy again in November 1997, when the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit was held on the University of British Columbia campus in Vancouver. The APEC summit was a meeting of many Asian and Pacific countries, and students on UBC's campus protested the meeting of some of these leaders because of their poor human rights practices. One of the leaders most criticized was then Indonesian President Suharto for killing at least 500, 000 people when he came to power in 1965 and for waging a near-genocidal campaign in East Timor. Demonstrators tore down a barrier and were pepper-sprayed by the RCMP. Other peaceful demonstrators were subsequently pepper-sprayed as well. There was debate over whether the action was necessary. It was alleged that the initiative for the RCMP assault on the demonstrators was because of complaints from the President Suharto of Indonesia and President Jiang Zemin of China to the Canadian government about the demonstrators. The Indonesian and Chinese leaders both came from countries where demonstrators were routinely shot down by the government, and both found the demonstrators in Canada to be deeply upsetting, which led to pressure especially from Suharto on the Canadian government to silence the demonstrators.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 200[ref]
</ref> Suharto had made clear that his coming to Canada was dependent upon his "dignity" not being insulted by any demonstrators.<ref>
</ref><ref name="Martin-p198">Martin, Lawrence ''Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien'' Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 198.</ref> In response to Suharto's concerns about his "dignity" being called into question by protests, he had been promised by the Canadian government that no protesters would be allowed to get close and in early August 1997 the RMCP was informed by the PMO that the Prime Minister did not wish for any "distractions" at the up-coming conference.<ref name="Martin-p198" /> During the protests, a First Nations leader claimed to have overheard Chrétien giving orders to the RCMP to remove the signs protesting against the human rights violations in China and Indonesia at once before Suharto or Jiang had a chance to see them.<ref name="Martin, Lawrence page 200"/>
Chrétien responded to the media's questions about the incident at a press conference. He was asked about the pepper-spraying by a Vancouver-based comedic reporter known as "Nardwuar the Human Serviette", a frequent contributor to Canada's MuchMusic network, known for his high-pitched voice and odd attire, who told Chrétien that there was a song released by a punk rock band called "The Nomads" (a fictitious band Nardwuar had made up) called "The Suharto Stomp".[tpl]cite web|url=http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yWf2LLaHkM0 |title=Nardwuar vs. Prime Minister Jean Chrétien |publisher=YouTube |date=December 4, 2006 |accessdate=2010-04-20[/tpl][tpl]Verify credibility|date=September 2011[/tpl] Nardwuar then asked Chrétien "Do you think, if you were say 40 years younger, that you too would be writing punk songs about Suharto and protesting against APEC?" Chrétien replied that he himself had protested as a student, and that in a democracy, protests were to be expected. Nardwuar followed up by telling the Prime Minister that "Some of the protesters were maced." Chrétien asked "what do you mean by that?" Nardwuar then clarified "Mace? Pepper spray?" Chrétien then stated abrubtly "I don't know, these techniques did not exist in those days", which received big laughs from everyone in the room. Nardwuar simply smiled at Chrétien's joke, and the Prime Minister concluded his answer by adding "For me, pepper, I put it on my plate", with a smile while pantomiming shaking pepper onto a plate. This line also received laughter. However, allegations soon arose that someone in the Prime Minister's Office or Chrétien himself gave the go-ahead for the pepper-spraying of protesters. Chrétien denied any involvement, and it has never been proven.[tpl]cite journal |first=Bruce |last=Wallace |date=September 21, 1998 |title=APEC Protest Controversy |journal=Macleans Magazine |url=http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.com/index.cfm?PgNm=TCE&Params=M1ARTM0011768 |format=reprint |accessdate=2006-12-05[/tpl]
In January 1998, Chrétien's government announced that the CH-113 helicopters would be replaced by a scaled-down search-and-rescue variant of the EH101, carrying the designation CH-149 Cormorant. Unlike the Petrel/Chimo contract which Chrétien had cancelled in 1993, these 15 aircraft were to be built entirely in Europe with no Canadian participation or industrial incentives. The first two aircraft arrived in Canada in September 2001 and entered service the following year. His Maritime Helicopter Project was supposed to find a low-cost replacement aircraft. The candidates were the Sikorsky S-92, the NHIndustries NH90 and the EH-101, although critics accused the government of designing the project so as to prevent AgustaWestland from winning the contract.  A winner, the Sikorsky CH-148 Cyclone, would not be announced until after Chrétien retired.Politics, Procurement Practices, and Procrastination: the  CH-124 Sea King Helicopter Replacement Saga[tpl]dead link|date=January 2011[/tpl][tpl]cite web|url=http://www.ctv.ca/servlet/ArticleNews/mini/CTVNews/20031030/Sea_Kings_031030?s_name=budget2005&no_ads= |title=PM defends record on grounded Sea King choppers |publisher=Ctv.ca |date=October 30, 2003 |accessdate=2011-01-28[/tpl][tpl]cite news|url=http://www.cbc.ca/news/background/cdnmilitary/seaking.html |title=Requiem for the Sea King |publisher=Cbc.ca |date=November 30, 2008 |accessdate=2011-01-28 |deadurl=yes[/tpl] [tpl]Dead link|date=April 2014|bot=RjwilmsiBot[/tpl][tpl]cite web|last=Windsor |first=The |url=http://www.canada.com/windsorstar/news/story.html?id=2b077397-f0f8-48e2-8a31-04695520e2d9 |title=Helicopter delays blamed on Chrétien |publisher=Canada.com |date=January 12, 2008 |accessdate=2011-01-28[/tpl]
In February 1998, for the first time since 1969 a balanced budget was presented by the government.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 203. Shortly afterwards, the Chrétien government fulfilled its Red Book promise of 1993 by introducing the National Child Benefit program for the children of low-income parents.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 204. Through Chrétien and Martin still disliked each other on the account of the bruising 1990 leadership race, a cordial working relationship was established indirectly with Chrétien's right-hand man Eddie Goldenberg regularly meeting with Martin's aide Terrie O'Leary to work out mutually acceptable policies for the government to pursue. In March 1998, Chrétien won the leadership review required after every election by 90%.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 328 According to one of Chrétien's staffers at the PMO, Terry Mercer that "It was not long after the 98 convention that we began to see the first evidence that the Martin camp had no intention of letting nature take its course, and this began to cause problems throughout the system".Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 329 In April 1998, the government attracted much criticism when the Health Minister Allan Rock waged a successful battle to limit the number of Canadians stricken with Hepatitis C through government negligence who could collect compensation for their suffering.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 pages 204-205. Chrétien's biographer Lawrence Martin wrote that the attitude of Chrétien to the Hepatitis C victims was not unlike the "heartless" attitude that he during his time in the opposition he accused Mulroney of holding.
In August 1998, the Supreme Court of Canada in the Reference re Secession of Quebec ruled in favor of the federal government's claim that a unilateral declaration of independence on the part of Quebec was illegal, that to leave Confederation would require Quebec to negotiate with the federal government, and that Quebec could only leave after achieving a settlement with Ottawa granting independence. This ruling created the legal background to the bill that became the Clarity Act.
In October 1998, the APEC controversy came to the fore again when the New Democrat M.P Dick Proctor claimed during a flight to have overheard the Solicitor General Andy Scott tell his travelling companion Fred Toole that the inquiry into the APEC protests was going to be a white-wash, and that it had already decided before the inquiry had even began that Chrétien was going to be cleared of wrongdoing.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 pages 200-201. Chrétien denied Proctor's account of what he claimed to have heard Scott say, and initially Chrétien stated that Scott would stay on as Solicitor General.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 201. But as the controversy increased, Scott suddenly resigned, to be replaced with Lawrence MacAulay.
In late 1998 and early 1999, tensions between the Chrétien and Martin camps started to come out in the open with backbenchers loyal to the two men leaking unflattering stories to the press about their rival patrons.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, pages 335–336 Chrétien rarely changed the composition of the Cabinet, and so as a result, there had emerged by the late 1990s a group of deeply disgruntled Liberal backbenchers, who believed themselves to be Cabinet-worthy MPs, and were extremely frustrated that the Prime Minister would not elevate them to the Cabinet.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 335 This group become Martin's strongest supporters as they believed that only by deposing Chrétien could they achieve the promotion to the Cabinet that they so desperately desired. A major advantage enjoyed by the Martin fraction was that in a process starting in 1995 they were able to take control of much of the Liberal Party apparatus reaching  a point about 1999 where Martin supporters had an almost undisputed control of the Liberal party as opposed to the government.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 pages 324-328 When asked in an interview about why Chrétien allowed this to happen, Sergio Marchi said: "He just became complacent".Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 page328 Chrétien tended to focus his efforts on controlling the government via the PMO with one of his aides at the PMO Terry Mercer making the revealing remark during a meeting of the Liberal national executive in 1998 that: "I don't work for the party, I work for Jean Chrétien".Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 331 This tendency had became especially acute by the late 1990s when Chrétien was widely seen to have lost touch with the Liberal Party apparatus and caucus, and was described by Marchi as living in a "bubble" comprising himself and his people at the PMO with relations with those outside of the "bubble" growing more cold and distant as time went by.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 324 Chrétien was well aware of the Martin group and its ambitions, but as he believed that Martin had trouble making difficult decisions that the danger was minimal because "Mr. Dithers" Martin would never make up his mind.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 336 An additional problem for Martin in challenging Chrétien was that beyond the differences between Chrétien's "hard federalist" approach to Quebec and Martin's "soft federalist" approach, there were no major policy differences between him and the Prime Minister.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking 2003 page 244 Since the Clarity Act and Chrétien's entire "Plan B" approach to Quebec were very popular in English Canada, challenging Chrétien on that issue was considered to be unwise, and with no other issue to take a stand on, it was hard for Martin to make a case that Chrétien needed to go. Martin was not very likely to rally much support in English Canada on the thesis that Chrétien needed to be deposed because he was being too tough with the separatist government in Quebec City.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 321. Through Martin did not publicly oppose the Clarity Act, he also initially refused to voice support for it in public and several of his aides and Martinista MPs leaked the news to the media that the Finance Minister did not believe that the Clarity Act was a wise piece of legislation.
In February 1999, the Social Union Framework Agreement (SUFA) was signed between Ottawa and the 9 of the 10 provinces (Premier Lucien Bouchard of Quebec refused to sign the agreement).Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 315. The SUFA had promoted by the Inter-government affairs minister Stéphane Dion as a way of promoting a new era of federal-provincial harmony, but Chrétien himself was unenthusiastic, taking the view that the SUFA had given too much to the provinces and Chrétien had only signed the SUFA as a way of gaining the support of the 9 English provinces in his battles against the Bouchard government in Quebec.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, page 316. The SUFA turned out to be largely meaningless as the provinces and the federal government spent money on various social programs with little effort at the sort of co-operation that the SUFA had envisioned.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010, pages 316-317.
In the spring of 1999, Chrétien supported Canada's involvement in NATO's bombing campaign of Yugoslavia over the issue of Kosovo, even through the operation was unsanctioned by the UN Security Council thanks to a Russian veto of an Anglo-American resolution asking for the Security Council's approval of the NATO bombing. The idea of bombing Yugoslavia caused some discomfort within the ranks of the Liberal party as the NATO campaign effectively meant supporting Kosovo separatists against a government determined to prevent Kosovo's secession from Yugoslavia.
In June 1999, Peter Donolo, Chrétien's well liked communications director, retired to be replaced with Françoise Ducros.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 240. Donolo was not part of Chrétien's inner circle, which comprised Eddie Goldenberg, Jean Pelletier and his wife Aline, but he often exercised a certain stabilizing influence on Chrétien, and was able to maintain good relations with the Martin camp. Donolo did not approve of some of Chrétien's other advisors like Warren Kinsella, whom Donolo accused of being overtly aggressive and of seeing enemies everywhere. Kinsella for his part saw Martin and his followers as almost much an enemy as the opposition parties, and favored working against as opposed to working with the Martin fraction.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 39. Reflecting the changed media team of Ducros and Kinsella, after a minor cabinet reshuffle in the summer of 1999, a story was leaked from the PMO that the reshuffle was a "shot across the bow" that was intended to send the message that Chrétien would be seeking a third term, a message that Donolo felt was unwise as it was bound to provoke a response from the Martin camp.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 241-242.
In 1999, Chrétien decided to follow up his victory in Reference re Secession of Quebec in 1998 by passing the Clarity Act. Jean Pelletier recalled in an interview about the genesis of the Clarity Act:  "The Clarity Act was Jean Chrétien's idea. I don't want to minimize the role of Dion, but in the beginning, he was not in favour of it. In fact, when the Act was brought to cabinet, there was only one vote in favour, and it was Jean Chrétien. Everyone else was against or unsure, including Dion. We tried twice to get Jean Charest to carry the ball for the Act. We met him twice, Dion and me, but he refused. There was one meeting in the spring and another in the autumn of 1999. The package was ready, the law was printed and it was ready to be introduced."[ref]
