[[Jim O'Rourke (musician)]]

CATEGORIES: Free improvisation, American experimental musicians, 1969 births, Living people, Sonic Youth members, American rock bass guitarists, Musicians from Chicago, Illinois, DePaul University alumni, Grammy Award-winning artists, Hurdy-gurdy players, Tzadik Records artists, Drag City artists

Jim O'Rourke (born January 18, 1969) is an Irish American musician and record producer. He was long associated with the Chicago experimental and improv scene. Around 2000 he relocated to New York before moving on to Tokyo, Japan where he currently resides.

==Biography==

Born in Chicago, Illinois, O'Rourke is an alumnus of DePaul University.
He has released albums of jazz, noise, electronica and rock music. O'Rourke has collaborated with Thurston Moore, Lee Ranaldo, Derek Bailey, Mats Gustafsson, Mayo Thompson, Brigitte Fontaine, Loren Mazzacane Connors, Merzbow, Nurse with Wound, Phill Niblock, Fennesz, Organum, Phew, Henry Kaiser, Flying Saucer Attack, and in 2006 mixed Joanna Newsom's album Ys. In 2009 he also mixed several tracks on Newsom's follow up Have One On Me.
He has produced albums by artists such as  Sonic Youth, Wilco, Stereolab, Superchunk, Kahimi Karie, Quruli, John Fahey, Smog, Faust, Tony Conrad, The Red Krayola, Bobby Conn, Beth Orton, Joanna Newsom and U.S. Maple. He mixed Wilco's Yankee Hotel Foxtrot album and produced their 2004 album, A Ghost Is Born, for which he won a Grammy Award for "Best Alternative Album". During the recording of Yankee Hotel Foxtrot, O'Rourke collaborated with Wilco member Jeff Tweedy and pre-Wilco Glenn Kotche under the name Loose Fur. Their self-titled debut was released in 2003 with a follow-up in 2006 entitled Born Again in the USA. He also mixed the unfinished recordings that made up a planned third album by the late American singer-songwriter Judee Sill, recorded in 1974 and mixed by O'Rourke for a 2005 release.
O'Rourke was once a member of Illusion of Safety, Gastr Del Sol (with David Grubbs)Strong, Martin C. (2003) The Great Indie Discography, Canongate, ISBN 1-84195-335-0, p. 522-3 and Sonic Youth. Beginning in 1999 he played bass guitar, guitar and synthesizer with Sonic Youth, in addition to recording and mixing duties with the group. He withdrew as a full member in late 2005, but continues to play with them in some of their side projects.
In the early 1993, O'Rourke formed an avant-rock group with Darin Gray and Dylan Posa called Brise-Glace. The band released one studio album, When in Vanitas..., in 1994. They also released a 7" in the same year titled In Sisters All and Felony/Angels on Installment Plan.
O'Rourke has also released many albums under his own name on a variety of labels exploring a range of electronic and avant-garde styles. His most well-known works may be his series of releases on Drag City, which focus on more traditional songcraft: Bad Timing (1997), Eureka (1999), Insignificance (2001), and The Visitor (2009). The titles of these albums all refer to films by the British director Nicolas Roeg; the first three by direct reference to film titles, the last being titled after a fictional album within Roeg's film The Man Who Fell To Earth.
With music director Takehisa Kosugi, he played for the Merce Cunningham dance company for four years.
In 2001, he was awarded a grant from the Foundation for Contemporary Arts Grants to Artists Award.

==Work in films==

==Partial solo discography==

==References==

==External links==


