[[NAMES Project AIDS Memorial Quilt]]

CATEGORIES: AIDS activism, Foundations based in the United States, HIV/AIDS organizations, Monuments and memorials in the United States, Public health education, Organizations based in Atlanta, Georgia, Visitor attractions in Atlanta, Georgia, Quilts, 1987 introductions

The NAMES Project AIDS Memorial Quilt, often abbreviated to AIDS Memorial Quilt, is an enormous quilt made as a memorial to and celebration of the lives of people who have died of AIDS-related causes. Weighing an estimated 54 tons, it is the largest piece of community folk art in the world as of 2010.

==History and structure==

The idea for the NAMES Project Memorial Quilt was conceived in 1985 by AIDS activist Cleve Jones during the candlelight march, in remembrance of the 1978 assassinations of San Francisco Supervisor Harvey Milk and Mayor George Moscone.  For the march, Jones had people write the names of loved ones that were lost to AIDS-related causes on signs that would be taped to the San Francisco Federal Building.  All the signs taped to the building looked like an enormous patchwork quilt to Jones, and he was inspired."History." The AIDS Memorial Quilt. 23 Feb. 2009 . It officially started in 1987 in San Francisco by Jones, Mike Smith, and volunteers Joseph Durant, Jack Caster, Gert McMullin, Ron Cordova, Larkin Mayo and Gary Yuschalk. At that time many people who died of AIDS-related causes did not receive funerals, due to both the social stigma of AIDS felt by surviving family members and the outright refusal by many funeral homes and cemeteries to handle the deceased's remains.Laderman, Gary: "Rest in Peace: A Cultural History of Death and the Funeral Home in Twentieth Century America", page 198. Oxford University Press, 2003 Lacking a memorial service or grave site, The Quilt was often the only opportunity survivors had to remember and celebrate their loved ones' lives. The first showing of The Quilt was 1987 on the National Mall in Washington, DC. The Quilt was last displayed in full on the Mall in Washington, D.C., in 1996,[ref]
