[[Murray Hill, New Jersey]]

CATEGORIES: Unincorporated communities in Union County, New Jersey

[tpl]For|other places with the same name|Murray Hill (disambiguation)[tpl]![/tpl]Murray Hill[/tpl]

Murray Hill is an unincorporated community within portions of both Berkeley Heights and New Providence, located in Union County in northern New Jersey, United States.
It is the longtime central location of Bell Labs (now part of Alcatel-Lucent), having relocated here in 1941 from New York City when the division was still part of Western Electric.Bell Labs Research in the United States, Alcatel-Lucent. Accessed June 1, 2012. "Bell Labs has been in operation in the United States since 1925, originally as part of Western Electric, and later, AT&T.  Today, Bell Labs is part of the innovation engine for Alcatel-Lucent. Headquarters was in New York until 1941, when the world headquarters for Bell Labs moved to Murray Hill, N.J., where it remains today." The neighborhood shares its ZIP code 07974Look Up a ZIP Code for Murray Hill, NJ, United States Postal Service. Accessed June 1, 2012. with the neighboring borough of New Providence.Look Up City by ZIP Code for 07974, United States Postal Service. Accessed June 1, 2012.
Murray Hill was named and founded by Carl H. Schultz, founder of a mineral water business once located at First Avenue between 25th and 26th Streets in the Murray Hill district of Manhattan.Staff. "CARL H. SCHULTZ DEAD; The Noted Manufacturer of Mineral Waters Expires at His Home After a Short Illness. PNEUMONIA FOLLOWS A COLD Career of the Poor German Boy Who by His Own Efforts Became One of the Leading Business Men of New York.", The New York Times, May 30, 1897. Accessed June 1, 2012. "Carl H. Schultz died yesterday morning in his home at Murray Hill, N.J., after a short illness." Schultz purchased a large tract of land there during the 1880s where he built a residence for his family and donated land to be used for a train station with the condition that the area be known as "Murray Hill".Cheslow, Jerry. "If You're Thinking of Living In/New Providence; A Commuter's Delight, With 2 Stations", The New York Times, July 17, 1994. Accessed June 1, 2012. "The first railroad station was built in New Providence in 1884 on land donated to the township by Carl Schultz, a businessman known as the Seltzer King of New York. 'Mr. Schultz, who built his country home in New Providence, made one stipulation when he donated the land,' Mrs. Chovan said. He wanted the section to be known as Murray Hill, after the Manhattan neighborhood where he had his regular home."

==Corporate residents==

==Transportation==

Mass transit to Murray Hill is available via the New Jersey Transit Gladstone Branch train line to the Murray Hill or Summit stations. Passengers heading to Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs can take the 986 bus route to shuttle between the facility and the train station.Directions to Bell Labs, Murray Hill, Alcatel-Lucent. Accessed June 1, 2012.

==References==


