[[Yasoda]]

CATEGORIES: People related to Krishna, People in Hindu mythology

Yashoda was wife of Nanda within the Puranic texts of Hinduism. Within the Bhagavata Purana it is described that Yasoda later became the foster-mother to Krishna, who was born to Devaki but was given to Yashoda and Nanda in Gokul, by Krishna's father Vasudeva on the night of his birth, for his protection from Devaki's brother, the king of Mathura, Kansa.

==Yasoda and Krishna==

Various childhood episodes or Lilas of Krishna, growing in Yashoda's household abound in Hindu religious texts, important amongst them are, Krishna giving darshan to Yashoda with his Vishwaroopa or his Divine Form. Also it is stated by Ved Vyasa in Mahabharata, the main Epic which portrays Krishna as principal hero, that venerable sage Maharishi Narada once visited Krishna at Brindavan.
Krishna as usual was playing in sand and was swallowing it. Mother Yashoda, upon seeing it, was furious with Krishna for disobeying her and punished Krishna by tying him to a grinding stone. Upon witnessing this act a couplet broke forth Sage Narada "Enna Thavam Saidhanai, Yashoda" which in Tamil literally means: "What penance have You (Mother Yashoda) undertaken to be bestowed with the powers to punish the supreme (Narayana)". And also seen as a question to Naryana himself as to how he accepts all this. It literally means what penance Yashoda had undertaken in her previous birth to be bestowed upon with the powers to punish, love, and care for the Supreme Vishnu. 
Upon this request it is said that Krishna opens his mouth in front of Yashoda who sees the Seven Oceans, the entire Universe with its vast expanse and also Narayana seated upon Adishesha (The Divine Snake), attended upon by his beloved consort Mahalakshmi. Upon this divine intervention, Mother Yashoda faints only to be revived by Krishna and attended by Sage Narada, who explains to her about Krishna's Life.,Story of Krishna and Yashoda Krishna stealing the butter, Krishna tied to mortar Krishna Tied to Mortar especially in couplets written by poet-saint Surdas,Maata Vachan where her deep affection for Krishna becomes an epitome of 'Vatsalya Prema', Mother's Love and even 'Vatsalya Bhakti’, Mother's Devotion,.VatsalyaYashoda and Krishna

==Yashoda and Balarama==

Yasoda also played an important role in the upbringing of Krishna's elder brother Balarama (the son of Rohini) and sister Subhadra. She also had a daughter of her own known as Ekānaṅgā.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


