[[Nonmetal]]

CATEGORIES: Nonmetals, Periodic table

In chemistry, a nonmetal or non-metal is a chemical element which mostly lacks metallic attributes. Physically, nonmetals tend to be highly volatile (easily vaporised), have low elasticity, and are good insulators of heat and electricity; chemically, they tend to have high ionisation energy and electronegativity values, and gain or share electrons when they react with other elements or compounds. Seventeen elements are generally classified as nonmetals; most are gases (hydrogen, helium, nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, neon, chlorine, argon, krypton, xenon and radon); one is a liquid (bromine); and a few are solids (carbon, phosphorus, sulfur, selenium, and iodine).
Moving rightward across the standard form of periodic table, nonmetals adopt structures that have progressively fewer nearest neighbours. Polyatomic nonmetals have structures with either three nearest neighbours, as is the case (for example) with carbon (in its standard state[tpl]#tag:ref|The standard state of an element (with one exception) is the most thermodynamically stable form of the element at ambient conditions. The exception is phosphorus, the standard state of which is the white allotrope, the most thermodynamically unstable, as well as the most volatile and reactive form.Greenwood & Earnshaw 2002, pp. 479, 482 It is also the most common, industrially important,Eagleson 1994, p. 820 and easily reproducible allotrope. For those reasons white phosphorus (rather than the black allotrope, which is the most thermodynamically stable form) is the standard state of the element.Oxtoby, Gillis & Campion 2008, p. 508|group=n[/tpl] of graphite), or two nearest neighbours (for example) in the case of sulfur. Diatomic metals, such as hydrogen, have one nearest neighbour, and the monatomic noble gases, such as helium, have none. This gradual fall in the number of nearest neighbours is associated with a reduction in metallic character and an increase in nonmetallic character. The distinction between the three categories of nonmetals, in terms of receding metallicity is not absolute. Boundary overlaps occur as outlying elements in each category show (or begin to show) less-distinct, hybrid-like or atypical properties.
Although five times more elements are metals than nonmetals, two of the nonmetals—hydrogen and helium—make up over 99 per cent of the observable Universe,Sukys 1999, p. 60 and one—oxygen—makes up close to half of the Earth's crust, oceans and atmosphere.Bettelheim et al. 2010, p. 37 Living organisms are also composed almost entirely of nonmetals,Schulze-Makuch & Irwin 2008, p. 89 and nonmetals form many more compounds than metals.Steurer 2007, p. 7

==Definition and properties==

There is no rigorous definition of a nonmetal. They show more variability in their properties than do metals.Brown & Rogers 1987, p. 40 The following are some of the chief characteristics of nonmetals.Kneen, Rogers & Simpson, 1972, p. 263 Physically, they largely exist as monatomic gases, with a few having more substantial (but still open-packed) diatomic or polyatomic forms, unlike metals which are nearly all solid and close-packed; if solid, they generally have a submetallic or dull appearance and are brittle, as opposed to metals, which are lustrous, ductile or malleable; they usually have lower densities than metals; are poor conductors of heat and electricity when compared to metals; and have significantly lower melting points and boiling points than those of metals (with the exception of carbon). Chemically, the nonmetals have relatively high ionisation energy and high electronegativity; they usually exist as anions or oxyanions in aqueous solution; generally form ionic or interstitial compounds when mixed with metals, unlike metals which form alloys; and have acidic oxides whereas the common oxides of the metals are basic.

==Applicable elements==

thumb|left|200px|Arsenic (here sealed in a container to prevent tarnishing) is commonly classified as a metalloid,Stwertka 2012, p. 104 or at other times as a nonmetal,Patten 1989, p.  192 or a metal.Russell & Lee 2005, p. 419|alt=Two dull silver clusters of crystalline shards.The elements generally classified as nonmetals comprise one element each in group 1 and group 14: hydrogen (H) and carbon (C); two elements in group 15 (the pnictogens): nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P); three elements in group 16 (the chalcogens): oxygen (O), sulfur (S) and selenium (Se); most elements in group 17 (the halogens): fluorine (F), chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br) and iodine (I); and all elements in group 18 (the noble gases), with the possible exception of ununoctium (Uuo).
The distinction between nonmetals and metals is by no means clear.Cracolice & Peters 2011, p. 335 The result is that a few borderline elements lacking a preponderance of either nonmetallic or metallic properties are classified as metalloids;Cracolice & Peters 2011, p. 336 and some elements classified as nonmetals are instead sometimes classified as metalloids, or vice versa. For example, selenium (Se), a nonmetal, is sometimes classified instead as a metalloid, particularly in environmental chemistry;Meyer et al. 2005, p. 284; Manahan 2001, p. 911; Szpunar et al. 2004, p. 17 and astatine (At), which is a metalloid and a halogen, is sometimes classified instead as a nonmetal.Emsley 1971, p. 1

==Categories==

Nonmetals have structures in which each atom usually forms (8 − N) bonds with (8 − N) nearest neighbours, where N is the number of valence electrons. Each atom is thereby able to complete its valence shell and attain a stable noble gas configuration. Exceptions to the (8 − N) rule occur with hydrogen (which only needs one bond to complete its valence shell), carbon, nitrogen and oxygen. Atoms of the latter three elements are sufficiently small such that they are able to form alternative (more stable) bonding structures, with fewer nearest neighbours.Addison 1964, pp. 41–2, 51, 61–3 Thus, carbon is able to form its layered graphite structure, and nitrogen and oxygen are able to form diatomic molecules having triple and double bonds, respectively. The larger size of the remaining non-noble nonmetals weakens their capacity to form multiple bonds and they instead form two or more single bonds to two or more different atoms.Brady & Senese 2009, pp. 858−63 Sulfur, for example, forms an eight-membered molecule in which the atoms are arranged in a ring, with each atom forming two single bonds to different atoms.
From left to right across the standard form of periodic table, as metallic character decreases,Shipman, Wilson & Todd 2009, p. 297 nonmetals therefore adopt structures that show a gradual reduction in the numbers of nearest neighbours—three or two for the polyatomic nonmetals, through one for the diatomic nonmetals, to zero for the monatomic noble gases. A similar pattern occurs more generally, at the level of the entire periodic table, in comparing metals and nonmetals. There is a transition from metallic bonding amongst the metals on the left of the table through to covalent or Van der Waals (electrostatic) bonding amongst the nonmetals on the right of the table.Russell & Lee 2005, p. 5; Zumdahl & DeCoste 2013, pp. 35, 784 Metallic bonding tends to involve close-packed centrosymmetric structures with a high number of nearest neighbours.Borg & Dienes 1992, p. 15 Other metals and metalloids, sandwiched between the true metals[tpl]#tag:ref|True metals are the alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, lanthanides, actinides, and d-block metals up to group 11.Wells 1984, pp. 1275, 77|group=n[/tpl] and the nonmetals, tend to have more complex structures with an intermediate number of nearest neighbours.[tpl]#tag:ref|Structural complexity in the other metals arises due to the influence of partially covalent bonding, the directionality of which dictates fewer nearest neighbours.Russell & Lee 2005, p. 5|group=n[/tpl] Nonmetallic bonding, towards the right of the table, features open-packed directional (or disordered) structures with fewer or zero nearest neighbours.Patterson, Kuper & Nanney 1967, p. 388; King 2004, p. 197; DeKock & Gray 1989, p. 426 As noted, this steady reduction in the number of nearest neighbours, as metallic character decreases and nonmetallic character increases, is mirrored among the nonmetals, the structures of which gradually change from polyatomic, to diatomic, to monatomic.
As is the case with the major categories of metals, metalloids and nonmetals,Ashford 1967, p. 329 there is some variation and overlapping of properties within and across each category of nonmetal. Among the polyatomic nonmetals, carbon, phosphorus and selenium—which border the metalloids—begin to show some metallic character. Sulfur (which borders the diatomic nonmetals), is the least metallic of the polyatomic nonmetals but even here shows some discernible metal-like character (discussed below). Of the diatomic nonmetals, iodine is the most metallic. Its number of nearest neighbours is sometimes described as 1+2 hence it is almost a polyatomic nonmetal.Townes 1952 Within the iodine molecule, significant electronic interactions occur with the two next nearest neighbours of each atom, and these interactions give rise, in bulk iodine, to a shiny appearance and semiconducting properties.Steudel 1977, p. 240; Greenwood & Earnshaw 2002, p. 803; Wiberg 2001, p. 416 Of the monatomic nometals, radon is the most metallic and begins to show some cationic behaviour, which is unusual for a nonmetal.Stein 1983, p. 165

===Polyatomic nonmetals===

Four nonmetals are distinguished by polyatomic bonding in their standard states, in either discrete or extended molecular forms: carbon (C, as graphite sheets); phosphorus (as P4 molecules); sulfur (as S8 molecules); and selenium (Se, as helical chains).Taylor 1960, p. 377; Miller 1987, p. 62; Irving 2005, p. 131 Consistent with their higher coordination numbers (2 or 3), the polyatomic nonmetals show more metallic character than the neighbouring diatomic nonmetals; they are all solid, mostly semi-lustrous semiconductors with electronegativity values that are intermediate to moderately high (2.19–2.58). Sulfur is the least metallic of the polyatomic nonmetals given its dull appearance, brittle comportment, and low conductivity—attributes common to all sulfur allotropes. It nevertheless shows some metallic character, either intrinsically or in its compounds with other nonmetals. Examples include the malleability of plastic sulfurPartington 1944, p. 405 and the lustrous-bronze appearance and metallic conductivity of polysulfur nitride (SNx).Labes et al. 1979[tpl]#tag:ref|Metallic or metalloidal character is further shown by sulfur, as follows. It is a solid, as are nearly all metals, and all metalloids, whereas the large majority of nonmetals are not. It has the highest superconducting transition phase critical temperature (10° K at 93 Gpa) amongst the non-metallic elements.Steudel & Eckert 2003, p. 60 Its most stable oxidation state is +6.Mitchell 2006, p. 24 It has a well-established cationic chemistry in superacidic media, extending to the isolation of sulfur salts such as S42+SbF6–2, a pale-yellow solid that is stable at room temperature.Wiberg 2001, p. 517Greenwood & Earnshaw 2002, pp. 664–5 The lower electronegativity of sulfur compared to its lighter congenor, oxygen, largely means that transition metal sulfides are more likely to be alloy-like semiconductors or metallic conductors than the corresponding oxides,Phillips & Williams 1965, pp. 577, 580–1, 583–4 a trend also evident in lanthanide sulfides. Thus, cerium sulfide (CeS) has a metallic bronze lustre, exhibits high-level metallic electrical conductivity, and can be machined like a metal,Eastman et al. 1950, p. 2250Krikorian & Curtis 1988 and samarium sulfide (SmS), a black semiconductor, can reportedly adopt a golden metallic phase by way of pressure, polishing or simply scratching on single crystals.Cotton 2006, pp. 29–30, 32 The diminished nonmetallic character of sulfur (and conversely its inreased metallic character) is further shown by the fact that zinc sulfide does not dissolve in alkaline solution whereas zinc oxide does.Martin & Lander 1946, p. 195 Sulfur can be combined with carbon to form a disulfide (CS2) which, above 50 GPa, undergoes an insulator-to-metal transition. As yet this is puzzling behaviour given the most "metallic" organic polymers, other than compressed CS2, exhibit barely metallic conductivity.Dias et al. 2011 When sulfur is introduced as a doping agent, it causes silicon to exhibit metal-like conduction and associated enhanced light absorption characteristics (from low-frequency visible light through near- and short-wave-infrared wavelengths that would normally pass right through regular silicon).Winkler 2009, pp. 16, 139Winkler et al. 2011 Sulfur is a photoconductor (sometimes described as a semiconductor),Yu & Cardona 2010, p. 1 which means that its electrical conductivity increases by up to a million-fold when illuminated.Moss 1952, pp. 180–84 It becomes a (liquid) semiconductor at 900°C, with an electrical conductivity of 5 × 10−5 S•cm−1 (about a trillion times that of its room temperature conductivity, and twice that of boron, a metalloid).Steudel 2003, pp. 106–7Schaefer 1968, p. 76 In 2013 researchers reported metallic conductivity in linear chains of sulfur atoms, isolated inside carbon nanotubes, at ambient conditions.Fujimori et al. 2013 Sulfur trioxide is a glass-former,Phifer 2000, p. 1 as are oxides of phosphorus and seleniumRao 2002, p. 22 and, at 40 GPa, carbon dioxide.McMillan 2006|group=n[/tpl]
The polyatomic nonmetals are distinguished from the diatomic nonmetals by virtue of having higher coordination numbers, higher melting points (in their thermodynamically most stable forms), and higher boiling points; and having wider liquid ranges and lower room temperature volatility.Lide 2003 More generally they show a marked tendency to exist in allotropic forms, and a stronger inclination to catenate;Steudel & Strauss 1984, p. 135 and have a weaker ability to form hydrogen bonds.Novak 1979, p. 281 The ability of carbon to catenate, in particular, is fundamental to the field of organic chemistry and life on Earth.Chapman & Jarvis 2003, p. 23[tpl]#tag:ref|After carbon, phosphorus shows the next strongest ability to catenate.Wiberg 2001, p. 686|group=n[/tpl] All of the polyatomic nonmetals are solids, and all are known in either malleable, pliable or ductile forms; most also have lower ionisation energies and electronegativities than those of the diatomic nonmetals.

===Diatomic nonmetals===

Seven nonmetals exist as diatomic molecules in their standard states: hydrogen (H2); nitrogen (N2); oxygen (O2); fluorine (F2); chlorine (Cl2); bromine (Br2); and iodine (I2).Shipman, Wilson & Todd 2009, p. 293 They are generally highly insulating, highly electronegative, non-reflective gases, noting that bromine, a liquid, and iodine, a solid, are both volatile at room temperature.Cairns 2012, p. 147Wiberg 2001, p. 416 Exceptions to this generalised description occur at the boundaries of the category: hydrogen has a comparatively low electronegativity due to its unique atomic structure;[tpl]#tag:ref|Hydrogen's single electron is not shielded from the single proton in its nucleus, resulting in hydrogen having an ionisation energy on par with that of oxygen. However, this configuration also means that a hydrogen atom's ability to attract another electron to itself is compromised by its single proton not being able to fully stabilise the electron-electron repulsion forces that arise between two valence shell electrons (resulting in the instability of the hydride H– ion).Rogers 2012, p. pp. 267–269; Murray 1976, p. 103–4|group=n[/tpl] iodine, in crystalline form, is semi-lustrous, and a semiconductor in the direction of its layers,Greenwood & Earnshaw 2002, pp. 800,804[tpl]#tag:ref|Iodine is an insulator in the direction perpendicular to its crystalline layers.Nelson 1998, p. 25|group=n[/tpl] both of these attributes being consistent with incipient metallic character.
The diatomic nonmetals are distinguished from the polyatomic nonmetals by virtue of having lower coordination numbers, lower melting points (compared to the polyatomic nonmetals in their thermodynamically most stable forms), and lower boiling points; and having narrower liquid ranges[tpl]#tag:ref|The liquid range of an element is the difference between its melting point and boiling point.Rayner-Canham & Overton 2006, p. 353|group=n[/tpl] and greater room temperature volatility. More generally, they show less inclination to exist in allotropic forms, and to catenate; and have a stronger ability to form hydrogen bonds. Most are also gases, and have higher ionisation energies and higher electronegativities than those of the polyatomic nonmetals.

===Noble gases===

Six nonmetals occur naturally as monatomic noble gases: helium (He), neon (Ne), argon (Ar), krypton (Kr), xenon (Xe), and the radioactive radon (Rn). They comprise a group of chemical elements with very similar properties. In their standard states they are all colorless, odourless, nonflammable gases with characteristically very low chemical reactivity.
With their closed valence shells, the noble gases have the highest first ionization potentials in each of their periods, and feeble interatomic forces of attraction, with the latter property resulting in very low melting and boiling points.Jolly 1966, p. 20 That is why they are all gases under standard conditions, even those with atomic masses larger than many normally solid elements.Clugston & Flemming 2000, pp. 100–1, 104–5, 302
The status of the period 7 congener of the noble gases, element 118 (temporary name ununoctium) is not known—it may or may not be a noble gas. It was originally predicted to be a noble gasSeaborg 1969, p. 626 but may instead be a fairly reactive solid with an anomalously low first ionisation potential, due to relativistic effects.Nash 2005 On the other hand, if relativistic effects peak in period 7 at element 112 (as is thought to be the case), element 118 may turn out to be a noble gas after allScerri 2013, pp. 204–8 albeit more reactive than either xenon or radon.

===Elemental gases===

Hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, chlorine, plus the noble gases are collectively referred to as the elemental gases. They are distinguished by having the lowest densities, lowest melting and boiling points, strongest insulating properties, and highest electronegativity and ionization energy values in the periodic table. 
It is not scientifically proven if any Synthetic elements with atomic number above 108 are gases. If it transpires that copernicium and flerovium are gaseous metals at or near room temperature, as some calculations have suggested,[tpl]Citation needed|date=May 2014[/tpl] the category of elemental gases may need to be sub-divided into nonmetallic gases and metallic gases.

==Comparison of properties==

Characteristic and other properties of polyatomic nonmetals, diatomic nonmetals, and the monatomic noble gases are summarized in the following table. Physical properties are listed in loose order of ease of determination; chemical properties run from general to specific, and then to descriptive.

==Allotropes==

Many nonmetals have less stable allotropes, with either nonmetallic or metallic properties. Graphite, the standard state of carbon, has a lustrous appearance and is a fairly good electrical conductor. The diamond allotrope of carbon is clearly nonmetallic however, being translucent and having a relatively poor electrical conductivity. Carbon is also known in several other allotropic forms, including semiconducting buckminsterfullerene (C60). Nitrogen can form gaseous tetranitrogen (N4), an unstable polyatomic molecule with a lifetime of about one microsecond.Cacace, de Petris & Troiani 2002 Oxygen is a diatomic molecule in its standard state; it also exists as ozone (O3), an unstable polyatomic nonmetallic allotrope with a half-life of around half an hour.Koziel 2002, p. 18 Phosphorus, uniquely, exists in several allotropic forms that are more stable than that of its standard state as white phosphorus (P4).[tpl]#tag:ref|White phosphorus is the most common, industrially important, and easily reproducible allotrope. For those reasons it is the standard state of the element. Paradoxically, it is also thermodynamically the least stable, as well as the most volatile and reactive form.|group=n[/tpl] The red and black allotropes are probably the best known; both are semiconductors; black phosphorus, in addition, has a lustrous appearance. Phosphorus is also known as diphosphorus (P2), an unstable diatomic allotrope.Piro et al. 2006 Sulfur has more allotropes than any other element;Steudel & Eckert 2003, p. 1 all of these, bar plastic sulfur which is malleable, have nonmetallic properties. Selenium has several nonmetallic allotropes, all of which are much less electrically conducting than its standard state of grey 'metallic' selenium.Moss 1952, p. 192; Greenwood & Earnshaw 2002, p. 751 Iodine is also known in a semiconducting amorphous form.Shanabrook, Lannin & Hisatsune 1981 Under sufficiently high pressures, just over half of the nonmetals, starting with phosphorus at 1.7 GPa,Yousuf 1998, p. 425 have been observed to form metallic allotropes.

==Abundance and extraction==

Hydrogen and helium are estimated to make up approximately 99 per cent of all ordinary matter in the universe. Less than five per cent of the Universe is believed to be made of ordinary matter, represented by stars, planets and living beings. The balance is made of dark energy and dark matter, both of which are poorly understood at present.Ostriker & Steinhardt 2001
Hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and constitute the great bulk of the Earth's atmosphere, oceans, crust, and biosphere; the remaining nonmetals have abundances of 0.5 per cent or less. In comparison, 35 per cent of the crust is made up of the metals sodium, magnesium, aluminium, potassium and iron; together with a metalloid, silicon. All other metals and metalloids have abundances within the crust, oceans or biosphere of 0.2 per cent or less.Nelson 1987, p. 732
Nonmetals, in their elemental forms, are extracted from:Emsley 2001, p. 428 brine: Cl, Br, I; liquid air: N, O, Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe; minerals: C (coal; diamond; graphite); F (fluorite); P ( phosphates); I (in sodium iodate NaIO3 and sodium iodide NaI); natural gas: H, He, S; and from ores, as processing byproducts: Se (especially copper ores); and Rn (uranium bearing ores).

==Applications in common==

Nonmetals do not have any universal or near-universal applications. This is not the case with metals, most of which have structural uses; nor the metalloids, the typical uses of which extend to (for example) oxide glasses, alloying components, and semiconductors.
Shared applications of different subsets of the nonmetals instead encompass their presence in, or specific uses in the fields of: cryogenics and refrigerants: H, He, N, O, F and Ne; fertilisers: H, N, P, S, Cl (as a micronutrient) and Se; household accoutrements: H (primary constituent of water), He (party balloons), C (in pencils, as graphite), N (beer widgets), O (as peroxide, in detergents), F (as fluoride, in toothpaste), Ne (lighting), P (matches), S (garden treatments), Cl (bleach constituent), Ar (insulated windows), Se (glass; solar cells), Br (as bromide, for purification of spa water), Kr (energy saving fluorescent lamps), I (in antiseptic solutions), Xe (in plasma TV display cells) and Rn (as an unwanted, potentially hazardous indoor pollutant);Maroni 1995 industrial acids: C, N, F, P, S and Cl; inert air replacements: N, Ne, S (in sulfur hexafluoride SF6), Ar, Kr and Xe; lasers and lighting: He, C (in carbon dioxide lasers, CO2), N, O (in a chemical oxygen iodine laser), F (in a hydrogen fluoride laser, HF), Ne, S (in a sulfur lamp),  Ar, Kr and Xe; and medicine and pharmaceuticals: He, O, F, Cl, Br, I, Xe and Rn.
The number of compounds formed by nonmetals is vast.King & Caldwell 1954, p. 17; Brady & Senese 2009, p. 69 The first nine places in a "top 20" table of elements most frequently encountered in 8,427,300 compounds, as listed in the Chemical Abstracts Service register for July 1987, were occupied by nonmetals. Hydrogen, carbon, oxygen and nitrogen were found in the majority (greater than 64 per cent) of compounds. The highest rated metal, with an occurrence frequency of 2.3 per cent, was iron, in 11th place.Nelson 1987, p. 735

==Notes==

==Citations==

==References==

==Monographs==


