[[Arthur Balfour]]

CATEGORIES: 1848 births, 1930 deaths, First Lords of the Admiralty, People from East Lothian, People of the Victorian era, People of the Edwardian era, People educated at Eton College, Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom, Leaders of the Conservative Party (UK), British Secretaries of State for Foreign Affairs, Secretaries for Scotland, Lord Presidents of the Council, Lords Privy Seal, Chancellors of the University of Cambridge, Chancellors of the University of Edinburgh, Rectors of the University of St Andrews, Rectors of the University of Glasgow, Conservative Party (UK) MPs, UK MPs 1874–80, UK MPs 1880–85, UK MPs 1885–86, UK MPs 1886–92, UK MPs 1892–95, UK MPs 1895–1900, UK MPs 1900–06, UK MPs 1906–10, UK MPs 1910, UK MPs 1910–18, UK MPs 1918–22, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for English constituencies, Members of the Privy Council of Ireland, Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom, Anglo-Scots, Scottish people of English descent, Christian philosophers, Deputy Lieutenants, Earls in the Peerage of the United Kingdom, Members of the Order of Merit, Scottish Presbyterians, British Anglicans, Scottish writers, Alumni of Trinity College, Cambridge, Knights of the Garter, Recipients of the Cross of Liberty (Estonia), Fellows of the Royal Society, Leaders of the House of Commons, Manchester United F.C. directors and chairmen, Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Presidents of the British Academy, Members of Parliament of the United Kingdom for the City of London, Presidents of the Aristotelian Society

Arthur James Balfour, 1st Earl of Balfour, KG, OM, PC, DL ([tpl]IPAc-en|ˈ|b|æ|l|f|ʊər[/tpl]; 25 July 1848 – 19 March 1930) was a British Conservative politician who was the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from July 1902 to December 1905. When he came into his inheritance at 21, Balfour became one of the wealthiest young men in Britain. He rose to prominence by suppressing agrarian unrest in Ireland through punitive action combined with measures against absentee landlords. After being influential in government, he succeeded his uncle, Lord Salisbury as Prime Minister and Conservative Party leader in July 1902.
Balfour was seen as an ambivalent personality and a weak Prime Minister. His embrace of the imperial preference championed by Joseph Chamberlain was nuanced, but brought resignations and the end of his spell as party leader. He opposed Irish Home Rule, saying there could be no half-way house between Ireland remaining within the United Kingdom or becoming independent. He oversaw the Entente Cordiale, an agreement with France that influenced Britain's decision to join the First World War. In 1915 he became Foreign Secretary in David Lloyd George's wartime administration, but was frequently left out of the inner workings of government, although the declaration of 1917 promising Jews a "national home" in Palestine bore his name. He resigned as Foreign Secretary following the Versailles Conference in 1919, dying 19 March 1930 aged 81, having spent an inherited fortune. He never married.
Balfour trained as a philosopher – he originated an argument against believing that human reason could determine truth – and had a detached attitude to life, epitomised by a remark attributed to him: "Nothing matters very much and few things matter at all".

==Background and early career==

Arthur Balfour was born at Whittingehame House, East Lothian, Scotland, the eldest son of James Maitland Balfour (1820–1856) and Lady Blanche Gascoyne-Cecil (1825–1872). His father was a Scottish MP; his mother, a member of the Cecil family descended from Robert Cecil, 1st Earl of Salisbury, was the daughter of the 2nd Marquess of Salisbury and a sister to the 3rd Marquess, the future Prime Minister. His godfather was the Duke of Wellington, after whom he was named.Tuchman, The Proud Tower, p. 46. He was the eldest son, third of eight children, and had four brothers and three sisters. Arthur Balfour was educated at Grange preparatory school in Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire (1859–1861), and Eton (1861–1866), where he studied with the influential master, William Johnson Cory. He went to the University of Cambridge, where he read moral sciences at Trinity College (1866–1869),[tpl]acad|id=BLFR866AJ|name=Balfour, Arthur[/tpl] graduating with a second-class honours degree. His younger brother was the Cambridge embryologist, Francis Maitland Balfour (1851–1882).
Although he coined the saying, "Nothing matters very much and few things matter at all", Balfour was distraught at the early death from typhus in 1875 of his cousin May Lyttelton, whom he hoped to marry: later, mediums claimed to pass on messages from her – the "Palm Sunday Case".[tpl]cite book | title=The Other World: Spiritualism and Psychical Research in England, 1850–1914 | first=Janet | last=Oppenheim | publisher=Cambridge University Press | year=1988 | isbn=0-521-34767-X | pages=132–133 [/tpl][tpl]cite book | title=The Victorians | first=A.N. | last=Wilson | authorlink=A. N. Wilson | publisher=Random House | year=2011 | isbn=1-4464-9320-2 | page=530 [/tpl] Balfour remained a bachelor. Margot Tennant (later Margot Asquith) wished to marry him, but Balfour said: "No, that is not so. I rather think of having a career of my own." His household was maintained by his unmarried sister, Alice. In middle age, Balfour had a 40-year friendship with Mary Charteris (née Wyndham), Lady Elcho, later Countess of Wemyss and March.[tpl]cite web | url=http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/works-of-art/27.67 | title=The Wyndham Sisters: Lady Elcho, Mrs. Adeane, and Mrs. Tennant | publisher=The Metropolitan Museum of Art | date=1899, published February 2010 | accessdate=4 June 2012 | last=Sargent | first=John Singer | authorlink=John Singer Sargent[/tpl] Although one biographer writes that "it is difficult to say how far the relationship went", her letters suggest they may have become lovers in 1887 and may have engaged in sado-masochism,Adams, Balfour, The Last Grandee, p. 47. a claim echoed by A. N. Wilson. Another biographer believes they had "no direct physical relationship", although he dismisses as unlikely suggestions that Balfour was homosexual, or, in view of a time during the Boer War when he replied to a message while drying himself after his bath, Lord Beaverbrook's claim that he was "a hermaphrodite" whom no-one saw naked.Mackay, Balfour, Intellectual Statesman, p. 8.
In 1874 he was elected Conservative Member of Parliament (MP) for Hertford until 1885. In spring 1878, Balfour became Private Secretary to his uncle, Lord Salisbury. He accompanied Salisbury (then Foreign Secretary) to the Congress of Berlin and gained his first experience in international politics in connection with the settlement of the Russo-Turkish conflict. At the same time he became known in the world of letters; the academic subtlety and literary achievement of his Defence of Philosophic Doubt (1879) suggested he might make a reputation as a philosopher.
Balfour divided his time between politics and academic pursuits. Released from his duties as private secretary by the general election of 1880, he began to take more part in parliamentary affairs. He was for a time politically associated with Lord Randolph Churchill, Sir Henry Drummond Wolff and John Gorst. This quartet became known as the "Fourth Party" and gained notoriety for leader Lord Randolph Churchill's free criticism of Sir Stafford Northcote, Lord Cross and other prominent members of the "old gang".

==Service in Lord Salisbury's governments==

In 1885, Lord Salisbury appointed Balfour President of the Local Government Board; the following year he became Secretary for Scotland with a seat in the cabinet. These offices, while offering few opportunities for distinction, were an apprenticeship. In early 1887, Sir Michael Hicks Beach, the Chief Secretary for Ireland, resigned because of illness and Salisbury appointed his nephew in his place. That surprised the political world and possibly led to the British phrase "Bob's your uncle!". Balfour surprised critics by ruthless enforcement of the Crimes Act, earning the nickname "Bloody Balfour". His steady administration did much to dispel his reputation as a political lightweight.
In Parliament he resisted overtures to the Irish Parliamentary Party on Home Rule, and, allied with Joseph Chamberlain's Liberal Unionists, encouraged Unionist activism in Ireland. Balfour also helped the poor by creating the Congested Districts Board for Ireland in 1890. In 1886–1892 he became one of the most effective public speakers of the age. Impressive in matter rather than delivery, his speeches were logical and convincing, and delighted an ever wider audience.
On the death of W.H. Smith in 1891, Balfour became First Lord of the Treasury – the last in British history not to have been concurrently Prime Minister as well – and Leader of the House of Commons. After the fall of the government in 1892 he spent three years in opposition. When the Conservatives returned to power, in coalition with the Liberal Unionists, in 1895, Balfour again became Leader of the House and First Lord of the Treasury. His management of the abortive education proposals of 1896 showed a disinclination for the drudgery of parliamentary management, yet he saw the passage of a bill providing Ireland with improved local government and joined in debates on foreign and domestic questions between 1895 to 1900.
During the illness of Lord Salisbury in 1898, and again in Salisbury's absence abroad, Balfour was in charge of the Foreign Office, and he conducted negotiations with Russia on the question of railways in North China. As a member of the cabinet responsible for the Transvaal negotiations in 1899, he bore his share of controversy and, when the war began disastrously, he was first to realise the need to use the country's full military strength. His leadership of the House was marked by firmness in the suppression of obstruction, yet there was a slight revival of the criticisms of 1896.

==Prime Minister==

On Lord Salisbury's resignation on 11 July 1902, Balfour succeeded him as Prime Minister, with the approval of all the Unionist party. The new Prime Minister came into power practically at the same moment as the coronation of King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra and the end of the South African War. The Liberal party was still disorganised over the Boers. The two chief items of the ministerial parliamentary programme were the extension of the new Education Act to London and the Irish Land Purchase Act, by which the British exchequer would advance the money for tenants in Ireland to buy land. An achievement of Balfour's government was establishment of the Committee on Imperial Defence.
In foreign affairs, Balfour and his Foreign Secretary, Lord Lansdowne, improved relations with France, culminating in the Entente cordiale of 1904. The period also saw the Russo-Japanese War, when Britain, an ally of the Japanese, came close to war with Russia after the Dogger Bank incident. On the whole, Balfour left the conduct of foreign policy to Lansdowne, being busy himself with domestic problems.
Balfour distrusted the American concept of equality. During negotiations over creation of the League of Nations, the topic of "all men being created equal" came up in the context of the American Declaration of Independence. Speaking to Col House, an aide to President Wilson and David Hunter Miller, the chief legal adviser to the US Commission, Balfour said "that was an 19th century proposition that he didn't believe was true. He believed that it was true that in a sence all men in a particular nation were created equal, but not that a man in Central Africa was created equal to a European."Source, notes of David Hunter Miller, pg 183, Vol I, The Drafting of the Covenant, 1928, Putnam.
The budget was certain to show a surplus and taxation could be remitted. Yet as events proved, it was the budget that would sow dissension, override other legislative concerns and signal a new political movement. Charles Thomson Ritchie's remission of the shilling import-duty on corn led to Joseph Chamberlain's crusade in favour of tariff reform. These were taxes on imported goods with trade preference given to the Empire, to protect British industry from competition, strengthen the Empire in the face of growing German and American economic power, and provide revenue, other than raising taxes, for the social welfare legislation. As the session proceeded, the rift grew in the Unionist ranks. Tariff reform was popular with Unionist supporters, but the threat of higher prices for food imports made the policy an electoral albatross. Hoping to split the difference between the free traders and tariff reformers in his cabinet and party, Balfour favoured retaliatory tariffs to punish others who had tariffs against the British, in the hope of encouraging global free trade.
This was not sufficient for either the free traders or the extreme tariff reformers in government. With Balfour's agreement, Chamberlain resigned from the Cabinet in late 1903 to campaign for tariff reform. At the same time, Balfour tried to balance the two factions by accepting the resignation of three free-trading ministers, including Chancellor Ritchie, but the almost simultaneous resignation of the free-trader Duke of Devonshire (who as Lord Hartington had been the Liberal Unionist leader of the 1880s) left Balfour's Cabinet weak. By 1905 few Unionist MPs were still free traders (Winston Churchill crossed to the Liberals in 1904 when threatened with deselection at Oldham), but Balfour's act had drained his authority within the government.
Balfour resigned as Prime Minister in December 1905, hoping the Liberal leader Campbell-Bannerman would be unable to form a strong government. This was dashed when Campbell-Bannerman faced down an attempt ("The Relugas Compact") to "kick him upstairs" to the House of Lords. The Conservatives were defeated by the Liberals at the general election the following January (in terms of MPs, a Liberal landslide), with Balfour losing his seat at Manchester East to Thomas Gardner Horridge, a solicitor and king's counsel. Only 157 Conservatives were returned to the Commons, at least two-thirds followers of Chamberlain, who chaired the Conservative MPs until Balfour won a safe seat in the City of London.

==Arthur Balfour's Government, July 1902 – December 1905==

Changes

==Later career==

After the disaster of 1906 Balfour remained party leader, his position strengthened by Joseph Chamberlain's leaving politics after his stroke in July 1906, but he was unable to make much headway against the huge Liberal majority in the Commons. An early attempt to score a debating triumph over the government, made in Balfour's usual abstruse, theoretical style, saw Campbell-Bannerman respond with: "Enough of this foolery," to the delight of his supporters. Balfour made the controversial decision, with Lord Lansdowne, to use the heavily Unionist House of Lords as a check on the political programme and legislation of the Liberal party in the Commons. Legislation was vetoed or altered by amendments between 1906 and 1909, leading David Lloyd George to remark that the Lords had become "not the watchdog of the Constitution, but Mr. Balfour's poodle." The issue was forced by the Liberals with Lloyd George's People's Budget, provoking the constitutional crisis that led to the Parliament Act 1911, which limited the Lords to delaying bills for up to two years. After the Unionists lost the general elections of 1910 (despite softening the tariff reform policy with Balfour's promise of a referendum on food taxes), the Unionist peers split to allow the Parliament Act to pass the House of Lords, to prevent mass creation of Liberal peers by the new King, George V. The exhausted Balfour resigned as party leader after the crisis, and was succeeded in late 1911 by Andrew Bonar Law.
Balfour remained important in the party, however, and when the Unionists joined Asquith's coalition government in May 1915, Balfour succeeded Churchill as First Lord of the Admiralty. When Asquith's government collapsed in December 1916, Balfour, who seemed a potential successor to the premiership, became Foreign Secretary in Lloyd George's new administration, but not in the small War Cabinet, and was frequently left out of inner workings of government. Balfour's service as Foreign Secretary was notable for the Balfour Declaration of 1917, a letter to Lord Rothschild promising the Jews a "national home" in Palestine, then part of the Ottoman Empire.
Balfour resigned as Foreign Secretary following the Versailles Conference in 1919, but continued in the government (and the Cabinet after normal peacetime political arrangements resumed) as Lord President of the Council. In 1921–22 he represented the British Empire at the Washington Naval Conference and during summer 1922 stood in for the Foreign Secretary, Lord Curzon, who was ill. He put proposed for an international settlement of war debts and reparations, called the Balfour Note, but met an unfavourable response.
In 1922 he, with most of the Conservative leadership, resigned with Lloyd George's government following the Conservative back-bench revolt against continuance of the coalition. Bonar Law became Prime Minister. In 1922 Balfour was created Earl of Balfour. Like many Coalition leaders, he did not hold office in the Conservative governments of 1922–4, although as an elder statesman he was consulted by the King in the choice of Baldwin as Bonar Law's successor as Conservative leader in May 1923. When asked whether "dear George" (the much more experienced Lord Curzon) would be chosen he replied, referring to Curzon's wealthy wife Grace, "No, dear, George will not but he will still have the means of Grace."
Balfour was not initially included in Stanley Baldwin's second government in 1924, but in 1925 he returned to the Cabinet, in place of the late Lord Curzon as Lord President of the Council until the government ended in 1929. In 1925 he visited the Holy Land.[tpl]cite news | url=http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,720211,00.html| title=In the Promised Land | publisher= Time Magazine| date= 13 April 1925 [/tpl]
Apart from a number of colds and occasional influenza, Balfour had good health until 1928, and remained until then a regular tennis player. Four years previously he had been the first president of the International Lawn Tennis Club of Great Britain. At the end of 1928 most of his teeth were removed and he suffered the unremitting circulatory trouble which ended his life. Late in January 1929 Balfour was taken from Whittingehame to Fisher's Hill, his brother Gerald's home near Woking, Surrey. In the past he had suffered occasional phlebitis and by late 1929 he was immobilised by it. Finally, soon after receiving a visit from his friend Chaim Weizmann, Balfour died at Fisher's Hill on 19 March 1930. At his request a public funeral was declined and he was buried on 22 March beside members of his family at Whittingehame in a Church of Scotland service, though he also belonged to the Church of England. By special remainder, the title passed to his brother Gerald.
His obituaries in The Times, The Guardian and the Daily Herald did not mention the declaration for which he is most famous.Teveth, Shabtai (1985) Ben-Gurion and the Palestinian Arabs. From Peace to War. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-503562-3. Page 106.

==Personality==

Balfour developed a manner known to friends as the Balfourian manner. Harold Begbie, a journalist, in a book called Mirrors of Downing Street, criticised Balfour for his manner, personality and self-obsession. Begbie disagreed with Balfour's political views, but even his one-sided criticisms do not entirely conceal Balfour's shyness and diffidence. The sections of the work dealing with Balfour's personality were:

Churchill compared Balfour to Herbert Asquith: "The difference between Balfour and Asquith is that Arthur is wicked and moral, while Asquith is good and immoral." Balfour said of himself, "I am more or less happy when being praised, not very comfortable when being abused, but I have moments of uneasiness when being explained."History of Arthur James Balfour – GOV.UK. Number10.gov.uk (19 March 1930). Retrieved on 15 August 2013.

==Writings and academic achievements==

Balfour is thought to have formulated the basis for the evolutionary argument against naturalism, the idea that it is rational to think human cognitive facilities beliefs are not designed to perceive the truth. He was a member of the Society for Psychical Research, a society studying psychic and paranormal phenomena, and was its president from 1892–1894.

==Artistic==

After the First World War, when there was controversy over the style of headstone proposed for use on British war graves being taken on by the Imperial War Graves Commission, Balfour submitted a design for a cruciform headstone.[tpl]cite book|title=The Unending Vigil. The History of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission|last=Longworth|first=Philip|year=1985|publisher=Leo Cooper Pen & Sword Books|page=48|isbn=1-84415-004-6[/tpl] At an exhibition in August 1919, it drew many criticisms; the Commission's principal architect, Sir John Burnet, said Balfour's cross would create a criss-cross effect destroying any sense of "restful diginity", Edwin Lutyens called it "extraordinarily ugly", and its shape was variously described as resembling a shooting target or bottle. His design was not accepted but the Commission offered him a second chance to submit another design which he did not take up, having been refused once.[tpl]cite book|title=The Unending Vigil|page=49[/tpl] After a further exhibition in the House of Commons, the "Balfour cross" was ultimately rejected in favour of the standard headstone the Commission permanently adopted because the latter offered more space for inscriptions and service emblems.[tpl]cite book|title=The Unending Vigil|page=50[/tpl]

==Popular culture==

==See also==

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==

Biography:
Other:

==External links==

==Succession boxes==


