[[Myrna Loy]]

CATEGORIES: 1905 births, 1993 deaths, 20th-century American actresses, 20th-century American writers, 20th-century women writers, Academy Honorary Award recipients, Actresses from Montana, American film actresses, American memoirists, American Methodists, American people of Scottish descent, American people of Swedish descent, American people of Welsh descent, American silent film actresses, American stage actresses, American television actresses, American women writers, Deaths from surgical complications, Kennedy Center honorees, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer contract players, People from Broadwater County, Montana, People from New York City, Warner Bros. contract players, Analysands of Ruth Mack Brunswick, Montana Democrats, New York Democrats, People from Helena, Montana

Myrna Loy (August 2, 1905 – December 14, 1993) was an American film, television and stage actress. 
Trained as a dancer, Loy devoted herself fully to an acting career following a few minor roles in silent films. She was originally typecast in exotic roles, often as a vamp or a woman of Asian descent, but her career prospects improved greatly following her portrayal of Nora Charles in The Thin Man (1934).Curtis 2011, p. 333.

==Early life==

Loy was born Myrna Adele Williams in Helena, Montana,Leider 2011, p. 1.Parish 1974, p. 443.  to Adelle Mae (née Johnson) and rancher David Franklin Williams, and raised in nearby Radersburg."Myrna Loy". MyrnaLoy.org. Retrieved: December 24, 2010."125 Montana Newsmakers: Myrna Loy Reynolds." Great Falls Tribune, August 23, 2011. Retrieved: November 17, 2011. Her paternal grandparents were natives of Wales, and her maternal grandparents were Swedish and Scottish."Myrna Loy, Once And Always; Actress, Activist & American Ideal: The Kennedy Center Honors a Star." The Washington Post via HighBeam Research. Retrieved: December 24, 2010.Reed, Rex. "Myrna's Back – And Boyer's Got Her." The New York Times, April 13, 1969. Retrieved: December 24, 2010. Her first name was derived from a whistle stop near Broken Bow, Nebraska, whose name her father liked. Her father was also a banker and real estate developer and the youngest man ever elected to the Montana state legislature. Her mother studied music at the American Conservatory of Music in Chicago.
During the winter of 1912, Loy's mother nearly died from pneumonia, and her father sent his wife and daughter to La Jolla, California. Loy's mother saw great potential in Southern California, and during one of her husband's visits she encouraged him to purchase real estate there. Among the properties he bought was land he later sold at a considerable profit to Charlie Chaplin so the filmmaker could construct his studio there. Although Loy's mother tried to persuade her husband to move to California permanently, he preferred ranch life and the three eventually returned to Montana. Soon afterward, Loy's mother needed a hysterectomy and insisted Los Angeles was a safer place to have it done, so she, Loy, and Loy's brother David moved to Ocean Park, where Loy began to take dancing lessons. After the family returned to Montana, Loy continued her dancing lessons, and at the age of 12, Myrna Williams made her stage debut performing a dance she had choreographed based on The Blue Bird from the Rose Dream OperettaWillis, Gertruce Knox and Mrs. R.R. Forman. W. A Rose Dream: A Fairy Operetta for Young People in Two Scenes. Philadelphia: Theodore Press Co., 1915. at Helena's Marlow Theater.Kotsilibas-Davis and Loy 1987, pp. 17–18.
Loy's father died on November 7, 1918, of Spanish influenza,"Loy, Myrna." accuracyproject.org. Retrieved: November 17, 2011. and Loy's mother was finally able to realize her dream to permanently relocate her family to California, where they settled in Culver City. Loy attended the exclusive Westlake School for Girls in Holmby Hills and continued to study dance in Downtown Los Angeles. When her teachers objected to her participating in theatrical arts, her mother enrolled her in Venice High School, and at 15, she began appearing in local stage productions.Kotsilibas-Davis and Loy 1987, pp. 25–29.
In 1921, Loy posed for Harry Winebrenner's statue titled "Spiritual", which remained in front of Venice High School throughout the 20th century and can be seen in the opening scenes of the 1978 film Grease. The statue was vandalized several times, and at one point was removed from display. However it has been recreated in bronze (the original was concrete with a coating of marble dust), and is on display again, surrounded by some thorny rosebushes to protect it.Los Angeles Times, April 11, 2001.
Loy left school at the age of 18 to help with the family's finances. She obtained work at Grauman's Egyptian Theatre, where she performed in elaborate musical sequences that were related to and served as prologues for the feature film. During this period she saw Eleonora Duse in the play Thy Will Be Done, and the simple acting techniques she employed made such an impact on Loy that she tried to emulate them throughout her career.Kotsilibas-Davis and Loy 1987, pp. 33–34.

==Career==

===Early years===

Portrait photographer Henry Waxman had taken several pictures of Loy, and they were noticed by Rudolph Valentino when the actor went to Waxman's studio for a sitting. He was looking for a leading lady for Cobra, the first independent project he and his wife Natacha Rambova were producing. She tested for the role, which went to Gertrude Olmstead instead, but soon after she was hired as an extra for Pretty Ladies, in which she and fellow newcomer Joan Crawford were among a bevy of chorus girls dangling from an elaborate chandelier.Kotsilibas-Davis and Loy 1987, pp. 37–41.
Rambova recommended Loy for a small but showy role opposite Nita Naldi in What Price Beauty? Although the film remained unreleased for three years, stills of Loy in her exotic makeup and costume appeared in a fan magazine and led to a contract with Warner Bros., where her surname was changed to Loy.Kotsilibas-Davis and Loy 1987, pp. 42–43.
