[[Stephen Kovacevich]]

CATEGORIES: 1940 births, Living people, American classical pianists, American people of Croatian descent

Stephen Kovacevich (born 17 October 1940), who before 1975 was known as Stephen Bishop and then Stephen Bishop-Kovacevich, is an American classical pianist and conductor.Adrian Room  Dictionary of Pseudonyms: 13,000 Assumed Names and Their Origins 2010, p. 62

==Biography==

Stephen Kovacevich was born in San Pedro, Los Angeles, California, to a Croatian father and an American mother. When his mother remarried, his name was changed to Stephen Bishop, the name under which he performed in his early career. He later discovered that he was often being confused with the singer and guitarist Stephen Bishop. To avoid the confusion, he began performing as Stephen Bishop-Kovacevich and later simply as Stephen Kovacevich.Hampstead and Highgate Express (12 June 2009). "Brahms brings balm". Retrieved 11 March 2013.
He made his concert debut as a pianist at the age of 11; then, at the age of 18 he moved to London to study under Dame Myra Hess on a scholarship and has been a London resident ever since, currently living in Hampstead. In 1961 he made a sensational European debut at the Wigmore Hall, playing the Sonata by Alban Berg, three Bach Preludes and Fugues and Beethoven's Diabelli Variations. He also toured Britain with Jacqueline du Pré.Elizabeth Wilson Jacqueline Du Pre: Her Life, Her Music, Her Legend 1999, p. 136
From 1961 to 1967 he was married to novelist and psychotherapist Bernardine Bishop née Wall. They have two sons, Matt and Foff Bishop.Guardian obituary http://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/05/bernardine-bishop
In 1967, he made his New York debut and since then he has toured Europe, the United States, the Far East, Australia, New Zealand and South America.
As a soloist and conductor, he has frequently performed and recorded works by, amongst others, Mozart, Beethoven, Schubert, Brahms and Bartók.
He has directed the London Mozart Players, Royal Liverpool Philharmonic and Vancouver Symphony Orchestra in this way. His chamber music partners have included Jacqueline du Pré, Martha Argerich, Steven Isserlis, Nigel Kennedy, Lynn Harrell, Sarah Chang, Gautier Capuçon, Renaud Capuçon and Emmanuel Pahud.
He has given master classes and recitals at Dartington International Summer School for many years.
He was the third husband of Martha Argerich; their daughter, Stéphanie Argerich, is a professional photographer.Gramophone Magazine (November 2008). "Martha Argerich speaks to Stephen Kovacevich with Jeremy Nicholas". Retrieved 11 March 2013.

==References==

==External links==


