[[Roger of Salisbury]]

CATEGORIES: 1139 deaths, Anglo-Normans, Bishops of Salisbury, History of Wiltshire, 12th-century Roman Catholic bishops, Lord Chancellors of England, 11th-century births, 12th-century deaths, Justiciars of England, Year of birth unknown

Roger (or Roger le Poer) (died 1139) was a Norman medieval Bishop of Salisbury and the seventh Lord Chancellor and Lord Keeper of England.

==Life==

Roger was originally priest of a small chapel near Caen in Normandy. He was called "Roger, priest of church of Avranches" in his notification of election to the bishopric.British History Online Bishops of Salisbury accessed on 30 October 2007 The future King Henry I, who happened to hear mass there one day, was impressed by the speed with which Roger read the service and enrolled him in his own service.[tpl]Citation needed|date=February 2007[/tpl]
Roger, though uneducated, showed great talent for business. On coming to the throne, Henry almost immediately made him Chancellor in 1101. He held that office until late 1102.Fryde, et al. Handbook of British Chronology p. 83 On 29 September 1102 Roger received the bishopric of Salisbury at Old Sarum Cathedral, but he was not consecrated until 11 August 1107Fryde, et al. Handbook of British Chronology p. 270 owing to the dispute between Henry and Archbishop Anselm. He was consecrated at Canterbury. In the Investitures controversy he skilfully managed to keep the favour of both the king and Anselm. Roger devoted himself to administrative business, and remodelled it completely. He created the exchequer system, which was managed by him and his family for more than a century, and he used his position to heap up power and riches. He became the first man in England after the King, and was in office, if not in title, justiciar. He was never called Justiciar during Henry's reign.Fryde, et al. Handbook of British Chronology p. 70
Roger ruled England while Henry was in Normandy, and succeeded in obtaining the see of Canterbury for his nominee, William de Corbeil. Duke Robert seems to have been put into his custody after Tinchebrai. Though Roger had sworn allegiance to Matilda, he disliked the Angevin connection, and went over to Stephen, carrying with him the royal treasure and administrative system upon Stephen's accession in 1135. Stephen placed great reliance on him, on his nephews, the bishops of Ely and Lincoln, and on his son Roger le Poer, who was treasurer.
The king declared that if Roger demanded half of the kingdom he should have it, but chafed against the overwhelming influence of the official clique whom Roger represented. Roger himself had built at Devizes the most splendid castle in Christendom. He and his nephews seem to have secured a number of castles outside their own dioceses, and the old bishop behaved as if he were an equal of the King. At a council held in June 1139, Stephen found a pretext for demanding a surrender of their castles, and on their refusal they were arrested. After a short struggle all Roger's great castles were sequestrated. But Henry of Winchester demanded the restoration of the bishop.
The king was considered to have committed an almost unpardonable crime in offering violence to members of the church, in defiance of the scriptural command, "Touch not mine anointed." Stephen took up a defiant attitude, and the question remained unsettled. This quarrel with the church, which immediately preceded the landing of the Empress, had a serious effect on Stephen's fortunes. The moment that the fortune of war declared against him, the clergy acknowledged Matilda. Bishop Roger, however, did not live to see himself avenged.[tpl]citation needed|date=December 2011[/tpl] He died on 11 December 1139. He was a great bureaucrat, and a builder whose taste was in advance of his age. But his contemporaries were probably justified in regarding him as the type of the bishop immersed in worldly affairs, ambitious, avaricious, unfettered by any high standard of personal morality.
Roger had a nephew Alexander (d. 1148), who became bishop of Lincoln in 1123. Other nephews included Adelelm, archdeacon of Dorset and later dean of the diocese of Lincoln, and Nigel of Ely, bishop of Ely. Roger's son Roger le Poer was Lord Chancellor for King Stephen. Roger built a castle at Devizes in Wiltshire, and the town grew up around the castle.Williams English and the Norman Conquest p. 211

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==


