</ref> He had offbeat and vulnerable qualities that Ashby wanted.<ref name= "Dawson5"/> Towne remembers thinking, "There's a real poignancy to this huge guy's helplessness that's great. I thought it was a fantastic choice, and I'd never thought of it."<ref name= "rabin"/>  [[Rupert Crosse]] was cast as Mule.

===Pre-production===

The project stalled for 18 months while Nicholson made The King of Marvin Gardens. Guber told Ayres that he could get Burt Reynolds, Jim Brown, and David Cassidy and a new writer and he would approve production immediately. Ayres rejected this proposal and the studio agreed to wait because they were afraid that the producer would take the film to another studio. Ashby and Ayres read navy publications and interviewed current and ex-servicemen who helped them correct minor errors in the script. The director wanted to shoot on location at the naval base in Norfolk, Virginia and the brig at Portsmouth, New Hampshire but was unable to get permission from the United States Navy. However, the Canadian Navy was willing to cooperate and in mid-August 1972, Ashby and his casting director Stalmaster traveled to Toronto, Ontario to look at a naval base and meet with actors. The base suited their needs and Ashby met Carol Kane whom he would cast in a small role.Dawson 2009, p. 138.
Ashby was busted for possession of marijuana while scouting locations in Canada. This almost changed the studio's mind about backing the project but the director's drug bust was not widely reported and Nicholson remained fiercely loyal to him, which was a deciding factor.Biskind 1998, p. 169. Just as the film was about to go into production, Crosse was diagnosed with terminal cancer. Ashby postponed principal photography for a week to allow Crosse to deal with the news and decide if he still wanted to do the film.Biskind 1998, p. 178. The actor decided not to do the film and Ashby and Stalmaster scrambled to find a replacement. They cast Otis Young.

===Principal photography===

Ashby decided to shoot the film chronologically in order to help the inexperienced Quaid and recently cast Young ease into their characters.Dawson 2009, p. 140. With the exception of Toronto doubling as Norfolk, the production shot on location, making the same journey as the three main characters.Dawson 2009, p. 141. Early on, Quaid was very nervous and wanted to make a good impression. Ashby kept a close eye on the actor but allowed him to develop into the role. Haskell Wexler was supposed to shoot The Last Detail but he could not get a union card for an East Coast production and so Ashby asked Nestor Almendros and Gordon Willis but they were both unavailable. Ashby promoted Michael Chapman, his camera operator on The Landlord,  to director of photography. They worked together to create a specific look for the film that involved using natural light to create a realistic, documentary-style. Ashby let Nicholson look through the camera's viewfinder as a shot was being set up so he knew the parameters of a given scene and how much freedom he had within the frame.Dawson 2009, p. 142. The actor said, "Hal is the first director to let me go, to let me find my own level".[ref]
</ref>

===Post-production===

The day after principal photography was completed, Ashby had his editor send what he had cut together so far.Dawson 2009, p. 144. The director was shocked at the results and fired the editor. He was afraid that he would have to edit the film himself. Ayres recommended bringing in Robert C. Jones, one of the fastest editors in the business who had been nominated for an Academy Award for Guess Who's Coming to Dinner. Jones put the film back into rushes and six weeks later had a first cut ready that ran four hours. Ashby was very impressed with his abilities and trusted him completely.Dawson 2009, p. 145. Jones cut the film with Ashby at the filmmaker's home and the process took an unusually long time as the director agonized over all the footage he had shot.Biskind 1998, p. 180. Ashby would ignore phone calls from Columbia and eventually executives higher and higher up the corporate ladder tried to contact him. Ashby was in London, England meeting with Peter Sellers about doing Being There when he received a phone call from Jones who told him that Columbia was fed up with the time it was taking for the film to be assembled.Dawson 2009, p. 147. The head of the studio's editing department called Jones to say that a representative was coming to take the film. Jones refused to give up the film and Ashby called the studio and managed to calm them down. Towne occasionally visited Ashby's house to check in and did not like the pacing of the film. According to Towne, Ashby "left his dramatizing to the editing room, and the effect was a thinning out of the script". During the editing process, Columbia hated the jump cuts Ashby employed.Biskind 1998, p. 183. The studio was also concerned about the number of expletives. It needed a commercial hit as they were in major financial trouble. By August 1973, the final cut of The Last Detail was completed and submitted to the MPAA which gave it an R rating. Columbia was still not happy with the film and asked for 26 lines with the word "fuck" in them to be cut.Dawson 2009, p. 148. The theatrical release of The Last Detail was delayed for six months while Columbia fought over the profanity issue. Ashby convinced Columbia to let him preview the film as it was to see how the public would react. It was shown in San Francisco and the screening was a huge success.Dawson 2009, p. 149.

==Release==

Ayres persuaded Columbia to submit The Last Detail to the Cannes Film Festival. After Nicholson won Best Actor there, it shamed the studio into releasing the film. The studio decided to give the film a limited release to qualify for Oscar consideration with a wide release planned for the spring of 1974. By the time of its wide release, any pre-Oscar hype that was generated was now gone.Biskind 1998, p. 193.
When the film was released for a week in Los Angeles, it received very positive reviews. In his review for The New York Times, Vincent Canby wrote, "It's by far the best thing he's ever done", referring to Nicholson's performance.[ref]
