[[Manhattan Christian College]]

CATEGORIES: North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, Association for Biblical Higher Education, Universities and colleges in Kansas, Education in Riley County, Kansas, Universities and colleges affiliated with the Christian churches and churches of Christ, Educational institutions established in 1927, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, Buildings and structures in Riley County, Kansas

Manhattan Christian College (MCC) is an institution of higher learning located in Manhattan, Kansas, USA.US News and World Reports "Best Colleges 2011" Manhattan Christian College was founded in 1927 as Christian Workers University. It initially opened for classes on September 19, 1927.[tpl]Citation needed|date=January 2014[/tpl] The school's name was changed to Manhattan Bible College in 1930, and on July 1, 1971, the name was changed again to Manhattan Christian College. 
MCC is historically affiliated with nondenominational, independent Christian Churches and Churches of Christ of the Restoration Movement. While many of the students and all the professors have a background in the Christian Church/Churches of Christ congregations, students from various denominational backgrounds are encouraged and welcomed.
The school is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission North Central Association of Colleges and SchoolsHigher Learning Commission Manhattan Christian Colelge and the Association for Biblical Higher Education.Association for Biblical Higher Education Manhattan Christian College

==Degree programs==

Programs of study include both single and dual-degrees (in cooperation with Kansas State University,Dual Degrees Manhattan Christian College as well as an adult degree completion program.  The college offers bachelor of arts or science degrees in various ministerial fields.  The Leadership Education for Adult Development (LEAD) degree completion program assists individuals interested in management and ethics in business, allowing them to complete a college degree for personal and career development.  MCC also offers two degree-completion programs through online distance education. 
MCC programs of study can be taken in conjunction with numerous programs at Kansas State University allowing students to earn two bachelor's degrees in five years.Dual Degrees Manhattan Christian College  Students may also choose to pursue a 2-year associate's degree, or simply obtain a 1-year certificate as well.

==Athletics==

The college offers many sports programs including men's and women's soccer, men's and women's basketball, women's volleyball, men's baseball, and men's and women's cross country which was recently added for the Fall 2010 season.  In conjunction with its athletic programs, MCC provides a unique and vibrant spiritual community.  Throughout a school year, one can find the average full-time student involved in many campus ministries as well as surrounding churches.  The program competes in the National Christian College Athletic Association Division II and is a member of the Midwest Christian College Conference.National Christian College Athletic Association Member Directory

==Notable alumni==

==References==

==External links==


