[[Maiden's Prayer]]

CATEGORIES: Western swing songs, Songs written by Bob Wills, 1856 compositions, 1938 songs

"A Maiden's Prayer" (original Polish title: Modlitwa dziewicy Op. 4, French: La prière d'une vierge) is a composition of Polish composer Tekla Bądarzewska-Baranowska (1834–1861), which was published in 1856 in Warsaw, and then as a supplement to the Revue et gazette musicale de Paris in 1859. The piece is a medium difficulty short piano piece for intermediate pianists. Some have liked it for its charming and romantic melody; others have described it as "sentimental salon tosh." The pianist and academic Arthur Loesser described it as "this dowdy product of ineptitude."
John Stowell Adams (d. 1893) wrote the first English language lyrics for the piece.[tpl]Citation needed|date=September 2009[/tpl]

==In country music==

The American musician Bob Wills heard "Maiden's Prayer" played on a fiddle while he was a barber in Roy, New Mexico,McWhorter, Cowboy Fiddler, pp. 59–60: "Bob said, 'He played "The Spanish Two-Step" and I locked the door where he couldn't get out and nobody else could get in, and I made him stay there until he taught me that and "Maiden's Prayer." Finally he nodded. I didn't know whether he needed to go to the bathroom or if I was doing it right, but I let him out.' That Mexican taught him those two tunes." and arranged the piece in the Western swing style. Wills first recorded it as an instrumental in 1935 (Vocalion 03924, released in 1938),Praguefrank's Country Music Discographies: Bob Wills – part II Retrieved 2 January 2012Allmusic "Maiden's Prayer" Bob Wills with music sample Retrieved 1 January 2012 and it quickly became one of his signature tunes. Later, it became a standard recorded by many country artists, including Buck Owens on his number-one 1965 album I've Got a Tiger By the Tail.Allmusic I've Got a Tiger by the Tail Buck Owens Review with chart and music sample Retrieved 1 January 2012 The tune is still a standard in the repertoire of Western swing bands.
Wills wrote lyrics for "Maiden's Prayer" and recorded it again in 1941 (Okeh 06205) with vocals by Tommy Duncan.Allmusic "A Maiden's Prayer" Bob Wills with music sample Retrieved 1 January 2012 His lyrics reflect the title, and the song, as written by Wills, opens with:
Relatively few country singers have covered "Maiden's Prayer" with vocals, but they include Ray Price on his tribute album San Antonio Rose (1962)Allmusic San Antonio Rose Ray Price Review with music sample Retrieved 1 January 2012 and Willie Nelson on his album Red Headed Stranger (on the 2000 CD reissue but not the 1975 LP).Allmusic Red Headed Stranger Willie Nelson Review with chart and music sample Retrieved 1 January 2012 Both singers used the lyrics written by Wills with minor variations, e.g. the maiden is an Indian in Price's version.
Wills recorded the song a third time on the 1963 album Bob Wills Sings and Plays. When he was inducted into the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1970, "Maiden's Prayer" was one of the works cited.

==In popular media==

Probably the most memorable use of "Maiden's Prayer" is in the 1930 opera Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny by Kurt Weill and Bertolt Brecht. The song appears midway through act I; it is played on an out-of-tune piano at a honky-tonk frequented by prostitutes and their clients. Jakob Schmidt, one of the denizens of Mahagonny, refers to the song as "ewige Kunst" ("eternal art").
"Maiden's Prayer" appears as an insert piano song in the anime series Strawberry Panic.
"Maiden's Prayer" is also played by garbage trucks in Taiwan. As residents have to take out their own trash, the garbage truck signals everyone to do so with the melody of this piece."'A Maiden's Prayer': A call to dump all our garbage" by Leo Maliksi (7 October 2008)"From Consensus to Shifting Coalition: Tri-partite Politics in the Taipei City Council", p. 21, by Jaushieh Joseph Wu, National Chengchi University, in Working Papers in Taiwan Studies No. 8 (where the piece is mistakenly attributed to Beethoven)

==In literature==

The Maiden's Prayer was used in a macabre context in Mary Wilkins Freeman's ghost story The Wind in the Rose-Bush (published 1903), where the main character, roused from sleep by the sound of the melody being played in a seemingly empty house, rushed downstairs to see who was at the piano, only to find that there was no one there.

==References==

==Bibliography==



