[[Lucius Mummius Achaicus]]

CATEGORIES: Characters in Book VI of the Aeneid, Ancient Roman generals, Roman Republican consuls, Roman censors, 2nd-century BC births, 2nd-century BC deaths, Mummii, Roman governors of Hispania, 2nd-century BC Romans, Roman Corinth

Lucius Mummius (2nd century BC), was a Roman statesman and general.  He later received the agnomen  Achaicus after conquering the Achaean League and bringing all of Greece under Roman control.

==Praetor==

Mummius became praetor in 154 BC. His ruling domain was further Spain. He experienced reverses there prior to restoring his image with victories against the Lusitanians and Blasto-Phoenicians. He received a triumph for his victory over the Lusitanians.A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology: Earinus Nyx, Sir William Smith (editor), J. Murray, 1880, 1119.

==Corinth==

In 146 BC, Mummius was appointed to take command of the Achaean War, and having obtained an easy victory over the incapable Diaeus, entered Corinth after a victory over the defending forces. All the men of Corinth were put to the sword, the women and children were sold into slavery, and the statues, paintings and works of art were seized and shipped to Rome. Corinth was then reduced to ashes.  However, at least two ancient authors give accounts that suggest Corinth was not completely destroyed.Cicero in Tusculanae Quaestiones 3.53, and Dio Cassius 21.  The apparently needless cruelty of Mummius in Corinth, by no means characteristic of him, is explained by Mommsen as due to the instructions of the senate, prompted by the mercantile party, which was eager to dispel a dangerous commercial rival. According to Polybius, Mummius was unable to resist the pressure of those around him.

==Censor==

In the subsequent settlement of affairs, Mummius exhibited considerable administrative powers and a high degree of justice and integrity, which gained him the respect of the inhabitants. He especially abstained from offending their religious sensibilities. On his return to Rome he was honored with a triumph. In 142 he was censor with Scipio Aemilianus Africanus, whose severity frequently brought him into collision with his more lenient colleague.

==Indifference==

Mummius was the first novus homo of plebeian origin to receive an agnomen for military services. His indifference to works of art and ignorance of their value is shown by his well-known remark to those who contracted for the shipment of the treasures of Corinth to Rome, that "if they lost or damaged them, they would have to replace them." For the theatrical pageants exhibited by him he erected a theatre with improved acoustical conditions and seats after the Greek model, thus marking a distinct advance in the construction of places of entertainment.

==See also==

==References==


