[[Murat & Jose]]

CATEGORIES: Slovenian hip hop groups, Musical groups from Ljubljana

Murat&Jose are a Slovene hip hop duo of writers, producers and MC. Both were born in 1978 in Ljubljana, Slovenia where they still live. Together with Nikolovski they were performing some time under the name Nedotakljivi (The Untouchables). Together they have published one of their first releases on the first Slovene hip hop compilation 5'00" of Fame za narodov blagor (5'00" of Fame for the National Welfare).
The album V besedi je moč (The power is in the word) from 2002 was their first solo LP. Some chosen ones have contributed their share: singer of a Slovene rock group Siddharta Tomi M. for a social conscious single Od ljudi za ljudi (From people for people), duo from Zagreb Bolesna brača for a song Na izi (On easy goin'), a vocalist from Kočevje Semo gave his part of reggae-balkan-soul (ragga banger) for Če hočem (If I want) and Dokler bova skupi (As long as we're together). Nikolovski collaborates with Neki ne štima (Somethin's wrong) and in V besedi je moč.Kdo je gengsta (Whos' the Gangsta) features mysterious Kemal Trofi & Jozafat.
The album was accepted very well as by expert critics as well as the wider audience. It received exceptional reviews in nearly all local media, the constant rotation of the first single SprediZadi (InFrontBehind) on all radio stations and specially of the second single Od ljudi za ljudi, of which music video was regularly performed on TV. V besedi je moč is namely a record which is totally different from all published Slovene hip hop albums. It does not include any curse, it is without regional/sexual/between band provocations, without any detailed descriptions of heroic deeds on the edge of the law or without any aimless wanderings about forbidden substances. 
Murat&Jose had in the past shared the stage with the likes of Das Efx, Afu-Ra, Little Brother and many other well known hip hop acts from all over the globe. Together with Heavy Les Wanted they have also appeared at Slovenia's first edition of mini urban festival Breakbeatnikk.
Murat&Jose have formed a live band in 2007 and the guys are now performing under the name of Murat&Jose Band. They have recently finished recording their new album, recorded fully live with the band. The album entitled Tuki Not is due in September 2008. Its first single Nazaj (Back) featured legendary slovene rock and soul singer Janez Bončina Benč, that came to his fame in the mid seventies. The second single featured local soul singer Maya (Be your own). For both singles the videos were filmed, watch them at Murat&Jose official website.

==See also==

==External links==


