[[Don O'Kelly]]

CATEGORIES: 1924 births, 1966 deaths, American male actors, American people of Norwegian descent, People from Brooklyn, 20th-century American male actors, American male television actors, American male film actors, Male actors from New York City

Don O'Kelly, (March 17, 1924 - October 2, 1966) was an American actor prominent in the 1950s and 1960s.  Though credited as "Don Kelly" in earlier performances, his billing was changed to "Don O'Kelly" in 1960.

==Background==

Don O'Kelly born Donald Patrick Kelly at Sheepshead Bay, New York, the son of an Irish-American father Robert J. Kelly and Norwegian-American mother Rachel Knudtsen was an American actor in the 1950s and 1960s. He did mostly television work.  Don O'Kelly began his career starring in "Tank Battalion" with Marjorie Helen (later Leslie Parrish-Bach).  
Don Kelly enlisted in the United States Navy on June 17, 1941 just prior to World War II and saw active duty aboard the USS Stanton and USS Palmer. He saw convoy duty at San Juan, Puerto Rico; Iceland; England; Scotland; Africa (Invasion), then a brief leave in the US and back on convoy to the European Theater; Africa; Italy (all phases of the European campaign); convoy duty then to Scotland; Africa; Iceland; Southern France (Invasion) through Channel into Pacific and then on to the Carolinas; Siapan; Tinian; Marshalls; Gilbert; Iwo Jima; Okinawa, and the Sea of Japan(when World War II ended).  Mr. Kelly saw active duty four years, three months, and 17 days and then went home, alive.  Don Kelly received an Honorable Discharge after the war and upon separation joined his cousin's ice skating show. O'Kelly née Kelly used his GI Bill of Rights to study acting with the Strasberg company in Hollywood, CA. He was a prolific painter.  Some of his art work is at the U.S.S. Elizabeth C. Stanton, AP69 Museum (affectionally known as "The Lucky Lizzie.")

==Career==

Don O'Kelly was a familiar face to series television fans during the 1950s and 1960s. As a character and lead actor with starring film role in Tank Battalion with Marjorie Helen (later Leslie Parrish-Bach).  His last starring role was in "The Hostage", made in 1966 and released in 1967, in which he received very favorable reviews. "The film owes its vitality primarily to the dynamic forces of the murderer, Bull, played by Don O'Kelly (Citing Hollywood Reporter's film review 8/23/66 "Hostage an exciting film").

==TV and film credits==

==Personal life==

He was married to Ruth Kelly, who is now retired and lives in The Villages of Central Florida. They had three sons, Michael David Kelly (who had three children: Elizabeth, Alexander and Ruby and grandson Tristen); Brent Robert Kelly (who had three children: Lori, Nicholas and Elissa); and Raymond Joseph Kelly (who had three children Heather (now married to Michael Weathers. The Weathers have one daughter Raegan) and Carissa (now married to Frank Jenkins.  The Jenkins have two children Daysia and Jaylen) and Raymond's youngest daughter Maria.  Unfortunately, Don O'Kelly died of stomach cancer shortly after "The Hostage" was released and just prior to leaving on a national tour promoting the film.

==References==

==External links==


