[[Capricorn One]]

CATEGORIES: 1978 films, 1970s science fiction films, ITC Entertainment films, Films directed by Peter Hyams, English-language films, Moon landing conspiracy theories, Hoaxes in fiction, Mars in film, Space adventure films, Warner Bros. films, Film scores by Jerry Goldsmith

Capricorn One is a 1977 thriller movie about a Mars landing hoax. It was written and directed by Peter Hyams and produced by Lew Grade's (British) ITC Entertainment. It stars Elliott Gould with James Brolin, Sam Waterston and O. J. Simpson as the astronauts.
Although Capricorn One is thematically a typical 1970s government-conspiracy thriller with similarities to Hyams's subsequent film Outland, the story was inspired by conspiracy theories surrounding the Apollo Moon landings.Bancroft, 2002.

==Plot==

At an unspecified time,Kelloway states that he has known Brubaker for 16 years, with Apollo 11 occurring during the period. Capricorn One—the first manned mission to Mars—is on the launch pad. Such NASA authorities as Dr. James Kelloway (Hal Holbrook) realize, too late, that a faulty life-support system supplied by a corrupt NASA contractor will kill the astronauts during the flight. As the manned space program needs a success to continue, they find themselves forced to falsify the landing rather than cancel the mission.
Minutes before launch, the bewildered crew of Air Force Colonel Charles Brubaker (James Brolin), Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Peter Willis (Sam Waterston), and Navy Commander John Walker (O. J. Simpson) are removed from Capricorn One and flown to an abandoned United States Army Air Corps desert base. The launch proceeds on schedule, but the public is unaware that the spacecraft is empty. At the base, the astronauts are informed they will help counterfeit the television footage during the flight to and from Mars, and that it is their patriotic duty to participate for the sake of national morale and prestige. Initially they refuse, but Kelloway, himself under extreme duress (from whom, what, or where is never clearly specified) to go through with the hoax, threatens their families if they do not cooperate, claiming a bomb will explode on a plane carrying the family members.
The astronauts remain in captivity during the flight and are filmed landing on Mars within a studio located at the base. The conspiracy is known to only a few officials, until alert technician Elliot Whitter (Robert Walden) notices that ground control receives the crew's television transmissions before the spacecraft telemetry arrives. Whitter mysteriously disappears before he can finish sharing his concerns with journalist friend Robert Caulfield (Elliott Gould). Caulfield discovers that all evidence of his friend's life has been erased and begins investigating the mission, surviving several attacks on himself and his reputation.
Upon returning to Earth, the empty spacecraft unexpectedly burns up due to a faulty heat shield during re-entry. The captive astronauts board a plane to be placed in the spacecraft but the plane unexpectedly turns around and returns to the airfield. They realize that something has gone badly wrong with the re-entry process and that officials can never release them because doing so would automatically expose the hoax. Knowing that the only logical solution for their captors is to kill them during the cover-up process, they break out of their confinement and escape in a Learjet, which runs out of fuel soon after take-off. Forced to crash-land and stranded in the desert, they attempt to return to civilization while being pursued by "black helicopters" (actually, olive drab in the film). They start walking in three directions and Brubaker is the only one to avoid capture.
Caulfield's investigation leads him to the desert, where he finds the military base and the hangar abandoned. Looking around, he finds a necklace given to Brubaker by his wife and concludes that the astronauts were in the hangar. With the help of crop-dusting pilot Albain (Telly Savalas), he searches the desert and rescues Brubaker before the men in the helicopters can capture or kill him. The film ends with Caulfield and Brubaker arriving at the astronauts' memorial service, exposing the conspiracy in front of television cameras and scores of witnesses who are astonished at his arrival.

==Cast==

==Production==

Peter Hyams began thinking about a film of a space hoax while working on broadcasts of the Apollo missions for CBS.  He later reflected regarding the Apollo 11 moon landing, “There was one event of really enormous importance that had almost no witnesses.  And the only verification we have . . . came from a TV camera.”Spacesuit: Fashioning Apollo, Nicholas de Monchaux, MIT Press, 2011.  This book sites the New York Times as stating “Watergate may not have inspired ‘Capricorn One,’ but it made its thesis more acceptable, its plot more credible and some of its content strangely prophetic.”  Hyams went on to become a successful television writer and director and began writing the script for Capricorn One in the mid-1970s. The failure of Peeper jeopardized his career, but Hyams and his friend, producer Paul Lazarus, were able to obtain the support of Lew Grade, head of production company ITC Entertainment, who agreed to a $4.8 million budget.Szebin, 2000Lew Grade, Still Dancing: My Story, William Collins & Sons 1987 p 247  The Watergate scandal from the early and mid-1970s also made the premise more plausible.
To stay within the budget, NASA's co-operation was needed. Lazarus had a good relationship with the space agency from Futureworld. The filmmakers were thus able to obtain government equipment as props despite the negative portrayal of the space agency, including a prototype lunar module. The film was originally scheduled to debut in February 1978, but good preview screenings and delays in Superman caused it to move to June. Capricorn One became the year's most-successful independent film.

==Other media==

Two novelizations of the film were written and published by separate authors. The first was written by Ken Follett (written under the pseudonym Bernard L. Ross) and published in the United Kingdom, the other written by Ron Goulart and published in the United States.Allison, 2007.
The Follett novel is notable for giving Robert Caulfield more development than the movie does, including giving him something of a relationship with CBS reporter Judy Drinkwater (who has more time here than in the movie) and ending the book with him and Judy (the story saves his career and results in his being employed by CBS).

==References==

===Footnotes===

===Bibliography===

==External links==


