[[Bard College at Simon's Rock]]

CATEGORIES: Gifted education, Bard College, Educational institutions established in 1964, Great Barrington, Massachusetts, Liberal arts colleges, New England Association of Schools and Colleges, Universities and colleges in Massachusetts, Council of Independent Colleges, Universities and colleges in Berkshire County, Massachusetts

Bard College at Simon's Rock, more commonly known as Simon's Rock (see below), is a residential four-year liberal arts college located in Great Barrington, Massachusetts, USA. Simon's Rock is an "early college", designed for students to enroll immediately after completing the tenth or eleventh grade, rather than after graduating from high school.
The college's founder, Elizabeth Blodgett Hall, had formerly been a private girls' school headmistress at Concord Academy. She concluded from her experience, and that of her colleagues, that for many students the latter two years of high school are wasted on repetitious and overly constrained work. Many young students, she thought, are ready to pursue college-level academic work some time before the usual system asks it of them.
Simon's Rock is the only accredited four-year early college to date and still the singular college or university to take this approach with all of its students.  It is one of a number of early college entrance programs that provide opportunities for students to enter college one or more years ahead of their traditional high school graduation date. A majority of students transfer to larger institutions after receiving an Associate of Arts degree after two years, although many stay for four to receive a Bachelor of Arts.

==Name==

The name "Simon's Rock" comes from a large rock, a glacial erratic, currently in the woods on the campus, a short walk from the main part of the campus. At the time that Simon's Rock earned its name (in the early 1920s), the woods that now surround it were part of the vast area of land called Great Pine Farm. The rock was a favorite spot for people who lived nearby, especially children. One neighborhood child, named Simon, claimed the rock as his own.
When envisioning the college in the early 1960s, Elizabeth Blodgett Hall deliberately named it nothing more than "Simon's Rock." Her reasoning for this was that even she didn't know if it would be a high school, a college, or something else.
Throughout its short history, Simon's Rock has gone through names such as "Simon's Rock," "Simon's Rock Early College," "Simon's Rock of Bard College" (for a period after 1979, when it was acquired by Bard College) and "Simon's Rock College of Bard".
In 2006, it was announced that the school would once again change its name, making it "Bard College at Simon's Rock".[ref]
