[[Xaibe]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places in Corozal District

Xaibe [tpl]IPAc-en|ʃ|aɪ|ˈ|b|eɪ[/tpl] is small rural settlement in the country of Belize. It is located in Corozal District. The name Xaibe literally means 'crossroads'. The people of the Maya civilization often traversed across the village to reach other Maya villages. The population of the village is very small. The last available data of the population of Xaibe in 2000 revealed that it had a modest population of approximately 1,254 people. There is, however, evidence of the fact that the people belonging to the Maya civilization resided in the Xaibe village. These people then gradually shifted to Mexico, just across the border at the time of the Caste War of Yucatán.

==Disasters==

Because of its location on the Caribbean coastline, it is vulnerable to tropical cyclones; Hurricane Janet and Hurricane Dean, both Category 5 storms, made landfall near Xaibe village in 1955 and 2007 respectively. The village was badly damaged by Hurricane Janet in 1955 and was substantially rebuilt.

==Access==

The nearest airports to the region include the San Pedro International Airport which is only 3 mi (4.82 km) away, the Philip S. W. Goldson International Airport being 60 mi (96.5 km) far and the Chetumal International Airport located 10 mi(16.09 km) away at neighboring country Mexico. The cities and towns close to Xaibe are Xcanluum, Patchakan, Chan Chen, Carolina, Calcutta, San Antonio, Ranchito and San Andres. Xaibe is also located only 2.5 mi (4 km) from the District's Capital, Corozal Town located at the Corozal bay.

==Education==

There is only one school located within the village limits: Xaibe Roman Catholic School(Xaibe R.C. School). The school has three main divisions: Infant Division, Middle Division, and Upper Division. Infant Division is divided into Infant I, Infant II, and Standard I, where kids from five to seven years old attend.  Middle Division comprises Standard II and Standard III.  Students from eight to ten years old attend.  Upper Division comprises Standard IV, Standard V, and Standard VI, which are for students from eleven to thirteen years of age.  At this last level students start to prepare for their Primary School Examination (PSE) which for primary school graduation.

==Politics==

The village as a whole has repeatedly voted the PUP village council, headed by Luciano Noh, for over 6 years and community affairs have – according to nearly all residents – worked well under the current council.  However, as is the case throughout Belize, finances are getting tighter and employment opportunities scarcer, and villagers from Xaibe are not immune to ‘feeling the pinch’.  Shop-keepers complain of heightened competition between vendors, a situation made worse by the overall decreasing demand for goods as more villagers are forced to rely on contraband Mexican goods solely to be able to provide for themselves and their families as inflation continues to afflict rural communities throughout our country.

==Economy==

The majority of villagers made their wealth during the climax of the sugar cane industry, and villagers are grateful to the past economy for having provided houses and land which, in today’s tight times, would be impossible to acquire.  However, the labour force of Xaibe today has forcibly become more fluid, adjusting to new industries and job vacancies that will at least provide a bare minimum salary, such as at the nearby Fruta Bomba papaya farm, and in the retail and service industry in the Free Zone and border Casinos.  For those who have not been able to secure employment locally, many have left the village to join more promising tourist industries in the Cayes and elsewhere in the country, although the current economic crisis is warranting many of these to suffer un- (or under-) employment too.

==Climate==

The climate in Xaibe Village is subtropical, similar to that in central or south Florida.  In winter, temperatures may drop to the high 50s F at night, but there’s never a frost.  In spring and summer, the thermometer may hit the low 90s at midday and drop only to the 70s at night. 
 


