[[Jim Diamond (singer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1953 births, Living people, Musicians from Glasgow, Scottish songwriters, Scottish male singers, Scottish pop singers, Blue-eyed soul singers, People educated at St Mungo's Academy

James "Jim" Diamond (born 28 September 1953, Glasgow) is a Scottish singer-songwriter, best known for his three Top 5 hits. The first was "I Won't Let You Down" (1982), as the lead singer in the trio Ph.D., with Tony Hymas and Simon Phillips. His solo performance, "I Should Have Known Better", was a United Kingdom number one in 1984. The third track was the theme song from Boon, "Hi Ho Silver" which reached Number 5 in the UK Singles Chart in 1986. He has also featured as a vocalist on the charity No.1s "You'll Never Walk Alone" with The Crowd and "Let It Be" with Ferry Aid.

==Early years==

He started his music career at the young age of 15 with his own band, The Method. This was discovered through a recent interview with Jim Diamond.Chatshow.net Chatshow.net  Diamond, at age 16, also fronted a Glasgow band called Jade.oocities.com/SunsetStrip/Palladium  That lineup included bassist Chris Glen who went on to play with "The Sensational Alex Harvey Band" and Jim Lacey on lead guitar who later went on to join The Alan Bown!. Jade played many pub, club and college gigs in London in 1969, playing at Brunel University, West London College in Cricklewood, The Pied Bull in Islington, West Hampstead Country Club, another college in Virginia Water and many more in 1969. They also supported The Move on their Scottish tour with The Stoics in the same year.
He later toured Europe with Gully Foyle (Stefan Kocemba, Iain McLeod (Clash), Robbie Manson (bass) Gully Foyle.The-blindman.com Rare recordings of his performances with Gully Foyle were recently discovered on the internet.
Diamond was discovered by Alexis Korner.Alexis-korner.net He spent the next couple of years as part of Korner's band. He provided additional and backing vocals on many of Korner's songs. Most of which would appear on The Lost Album.
In 1976 Diamond left Korner to form Bandit. The line-up included AC/DC band member Cliff Williams. They were soon signed up by Arista Records and released their début album, Bandit. They failed to reach the chart. In 1979 Diamond was lead vocalist for a Japanese band called BACCO. The debut album was Cha Cha Me.
Diamond went to Los Angeles, California to form Slick Diamond with Earl Slick.Jim Diamond Official Website He spent some time touring and recording and provided music for a film soundtrack.
In 1978, Jim married Christine Bailey (born 1951, New Zealand).Marriages search results in UK 1796-2005 The couple has a daughter, Sara Rosaline Diamond (b. 1978 in Hammersmith and Fulham, London)"Sara R Diamond - Marriages and Births England and Wales 1761-2006" and, a son, Lawrence James Diamond (b. 1984 in Hammersmith and Fulham, London)."Lawrence J Diamond - Marriages and Births England and Wales 1761-2006"

==Big break==

1982 would be Diamond's big break into the public eye when he formed Ph.D. (Phillips, Hymas and Diamond), with pianist/keyboard player Tony Hymas and drummer Simon Phillips. They were signed by WEA Records and had a hit single with the multi-million selling "I Won't Let You Down".
Diamond contracted hepatitis and the band later decided to part ways. In 1984, he decided to go solo and was signed to A&M Records. He had a number one hit with "I Should Have Known Better" and also was number one in Latin America. He scored another hit soon after with the theme song from Boon, "Hi Ho Silver". It reached Number 5 in the UK Singles Chart in May 1986. Diamond is also known for some guest vocals on two Genesis band members' solo outings including:
The 1999 compilation The Best of Jim Diamond compiles singles and B-sides from his short time with A&M Records.

==Recent years==

In recent years, Diamond has teamed up with saxophonist Chris "Snake" Davis, who is known for his work with soul outfit, M People. The pair were known as The Blue Shoes, but more recently have been billed as Jim Diamond and Snake Davis.
In 2005, Diamond released his first studio album in eleven years. Souled and Healed also gave Diamond the single releases "When You Turn" and "Blue Shoes".
Diamond's son Lawrence has followed in his father's musical footsteps and is the bassist with the UK rock group, Official Secrets Act.  The band signed a recording contract in 2008.
Jim Diamond’s latest album “City of Soul” released by Camino Records (catalogue number CAMCD40, release date 3 October 2011) features among others Wet Wet Wet drummer Tommy Cunningham and Greg Kane of Hue & Cry.City of Soul Official Facebook Page All proceeds from this album of Soul covers benefit the children's charity Radio Clyde Cash For Kids.STV News Article

===Singles (solo)===

===Charity singles featuring Jim Diamond===

==Television appearances==

==References==

==External links==


