[[Daniel Massey (actor)]]

CATEGORIES: 1933 births, 1998 deaths, Alumni of King's College, Cambridge, English male musical theatre actors, English male film actors, English male television actors, English male voice actors, People educated at Eton College, Male actors from London, Royal Shakespeare Company members, Deaths from lymphoma, Burials at Putney Vale Cemetery, Cancer deaths in England, 20th-century English male actors

Daniel Raymond Massey (10 October 1933[tpl]spaced ndash[/tpl]25 March 1998) was an English actor and performer. He is possibly best known for his starring role in the British TV drama The Roads to Freedom, as Daniel, alongside Michael Bryant. He is also known for his role in the 1968 American film Star!, as Noël Coward, for which he won a Golden Globe Award.

==Personal life==

Massey was born in London in 1933. He was educated at Eton College and King's College, Cambridge. He was a member of the noted Massey family, which included his father, Raymond Massey, his sister, Anna Massey and his uncle Vincent Massey, a Governor General of Canada. His mother was the actress Adrianne Allen.
Living with his mother after his parents' divorce, Massey rarely saw his father through most of his adult life; however, they were cast as father and son in The Queen's Guards (1961).
Massey was married three times, two of his wives being well-known actresses: 
He died in London after a three-year battle with Hodgkin's lymphoma, and was buried at Putney Vale Cemetery. Massey worked in theatre throughout his cancer treatments, rarely missing a performance.

==Career==

Massey made his film debut as a child in Noël Coward's flag-waver, In Which We Serve (1942) - Coward being his godfather. He would later play Noël Coward in the 1968 Julie Andrews vehicle, Star!, a performance for which he won a Golden Globe Award and received his sole Academy Award nomination. He first made a major impression as an adult as Laurence Olivier's son-in-law in the stage and screen versions of John Osborne's The Entertainer. Massey appeared in numerous British films from the 1950s onwards, including Cromwell, The Cat and the Canary, The Jokers, The Vault of Horror, Mary, Queen of Scots,  Victory!, and In the Name of the Father.
Other highlights of his career were his stage roles, especially that of the German conductor Wilhelm Furtwängler in Ronald Harwood's Taking Sides; Massey won the 1995 Olivier Award for his performance. He recreated the role for Broadway a year later earning a Tony nomination. His other stage appearances included musicals such as She Loves Me, Gigi (as Gaston), and Stephen Sondheim's Follies (as Benjamin Stone), for which he won another Olivier Award. In the 1980s and 1990s, he also appeared with the Royal Shakespeare Company in productions such as Love's Labours Lost, Measure for Measure and The Time of Your Life, the latter alongside John Thaw. On television, highlights include The Crucible (1980) as Reverend Hale, The Golden Bowl (1972) as the Prince and his performance as an AIDS patient in Intimate Contact (1987).

==Selected filmography==

==References==

==External links==


