[[Jaring]]

CATEGORIES: Internet service providers of Malaysia, Government-owned companies of Malaysia

JARING (Jaring Communications Sdn Bhd) is a Malaysian internet service provider based in Technology Park Malaysia (TPM).  It was the first internet service provider in the country and was formerly owned by MIMOS Berhad.
The word JARING was derived from Joint Advanced Research Integrated Networking.
Its current CEO None. Under stewardship of Dato Dr. Md Khir Abdul Rahman - Acting CEO

==History==

JARING introduced the Internet to the Malaysian community in 1992 when it was commercialized after its first international satellite leased-circuit at 64kps was installed, connecting Kuala Lumpur to Stockton, California.http://www.mimos.my/content/data/231108-the%20wimax%20revolution.pdf Started humbly with only 28 subscribers, it has grown to 0.8 million in 2005 and is expected to grow to more than one million by end of 2007.
In June 1997, JARING became the first Internet Service Provider (ISP) in South East Asia to install the T3 (45Mbit/s) line, which gives JARING subscribers faster access to the Internet. The circuit has then enabled JARING network users to be linked directly with the Internet, including the BITNET and NSFNet.
In 1999, JARING went a step further when an Internet backbone infrastructure which travels at the speed of 2.5 Gigabits per second transmission called SuperJARING was launched, making it the fastest and longest (841 km) IP-over-fibre backbone service available in the world at that time.
SuperJARING that runs across Peninsular Malaysia including the east coast has the capability to provide next-generation, bandwidth-intensive services like Internet telephony, secure virtual private networks (Secure VPNs), video-on-demand, distance learning and telemedicine.
JARING Communications Sdn Bhd was later established as a spin-off company under MIMOS Berhad on 1 April 2005.
In December 2006, the Ministry of Finance of Malaysia officially took over JARING from MIMOS Berhad.http://www.jaring.my/corporate/

==Awards and achievements==

JARING has distinctly positions itself to be firsts in the Internet industry and its evolving technologies and applications in Malaysia. Among JARING accomplishments are:-
1992 - Pioneered the Internet gateway in Malaysia establishing itself as the first Internet Service Provider (ISP).
1999 - The launch of SuperJARING Internet backbone that runs from North to South of Peninsular Malaysia at a speed of 2.5 Gigabits per second, establishing it the first, fastest and longest (841 KM) IP-over-fiber backbone service in the world at that time.
1999 - JARING is the first ISP to be awarded the Cisco Powered Network Certification. This certification is recognized to be of international standard that identifies JARING as a reliable provider with a high-performance secured network.
2000 - The first broadband Internet service based on IP-over-Optical Fiber was introduced and catered for business entities at 8 Mbit/s, 34Mbit/s and 155Mbit/s.
2001 - The latest state-of-the art Multi Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) was offered for the first time to secure the performance of the Virtual Private Network (VPN).
2001-2003 - Voted the best ISP under the Consumer Satisfaction Survey for three consecutive years by the Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission (MCMC).
2006 - In December JARING Communications Sdn Bhd becomes another arm under the Ministry of Finance of Malaysia.

==References==

==External links==


