[[Billy Corgan]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, American bloggers, American male singers, American music video directors, American poets, American rock guitarists, American rock singers, American rock singer-songwriters, American tenors, Lead guitarists, Living people, Singers from Chicago, Illinois, People from Elk Grove Village, Illinois, The Smashing Pumpkins members, American alternative rock musicians, Glendale Heights, Illinois, Zwan members, Alternative rock guitarists, Alternative rock singers, 20th-century American singers, 21st-century American singers

William Patrick "Billy" Corgan Jr. (born March 17, 1967) is an American musician, producer, lyricist, writer, and poet, best known as the frontman and sole permanent member of The Smashing Pumpkins.  Formed by Corgan and guitarist James Iha in Chicago, Illinois, in 1987, the band quickly gained steam with the addition of bassist D'arcy Wretzky and drummer Jimmy Chamberlin. The band's direction has largely been driven by Corgan through his confessional lyrics, grandiose production values, and virtuosic musical interplay, notably with Chamberlin.  In three years, The Smashing Pumpkins had transformed themselves into a major label success. Strong album sales and large-scale tours propelled the band's increasing fame in the 1990s, while Chamberlin's drug problems escalated until he had to be fired.  The Pumpkins continued as a three-piece until Chamberlin rejoined the band in 1999, then broke up in 2000.  Corgan started a new band with Chamberlin right away, called Zwan, and after their demise, he released a solo album (TheFutureEmbrace) and a collection of poetry (Blinking with Fists) before setting his sights on reforming the Smashing Pumpkins. He has also assisted Breaking Benjamin in making their album We Are Not Alone.
The new version of that band, consisting of Corgan, Chamberlin, and a revolving tour lineup, released an album in 2007 and followed it with extensive touring over the next year and a half.  Chamberlin left the Smashing Pumpkins in March 2009, while Corgan has continued to record and tour with a new lineup.

==History==

===1967–87: Childhood and formative years===

Corgan was born in Elk Grove Village, Illinois as the oldest son of William Corgan Sr., a blues/rock guitarist, and Martha Louise Maes Corgan Lutz. His parents had one more child, Ricky, before divorcing in 1970.William also fathered a half-brother, but Corgan has never found out who he is. See: Corgan, Billy. "The Toy Hammer."  The Confessions of Billy Corgan.  2005-06-02. His father was soon remarried to a flight attendant, and Corgan and his brother went to live with them in Glendale Heights, Illinois.DeRogatis, Jim. "Rock and Roll's Best and Worst Chicago Songs." Chicago Sun-Times.  July 30, 2003. During this time, Corgan alleges he was subject to much physical and emotional abuse by his stepmother.Corgan, Billy.  "Following the Moon." The Confessions of Billy Corgan.  July 1, 2005.  Corgan also developed a protective bond with his younger half-brother, who had special needs as a child.[ref]
