[[Lee College]]

CATEGORIES: Baytown, Texas, Greater Houston, Universities and colleges in Houston, Texas, Universities and colleges accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, Galveston Bay Area, Community colleges in Texas, Educational institutions established in 1934, Education in Harris County, Texas, Buildings and structures in Harris County, Texas, 1934 establishments in Texas

Lee College is a comprehensive community college located in Baytown, Texas, United States, approximately [tpl]convert|30|mi|km[/tpl] east of Houston.
Lee College's main campus occupies [tpl]convert|40|acre|m2[/tpl] landscaped near downtown Baytown and maintains extension campuses throughout its service area. The school has an enrollment of over 9,000 total students, with approximately 5,800 of them enrolled full time in one of over 60 academic, technical education, and non-credit continuing education programs.
As defined by the Texas Legislature, the official service area of Lee College includes territory within the following school districts:Texas Education Code, Section 130.186, "Lee College District Service Area".

==History==

Established in 1934.  Originally housed on the Robert E. Lee High School campus, Lee College severed its initial integration with the Goose Creek Independent School District under the leadership of the college's first dean, Walter Rundell.  In 1948, the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools granted Lee College accreditation and recommended that the college developed its own campus apart from the local high school.  A successful bond election in the following year allowed for the construction of Rundell Hall and the campus gymnasium.  The college experienced tremendous growth after classes began in the new buildings in 1951.
By 1965, the college had added the Social Sciences building, the Library, Moler Hall, TV1 and Bonner Hall as well as an addition the gymnasium. Funding from the 1988 bond issue allowed for the construction of a new science building to replace the antiquated facilities formerly housed in the math and administration building. The renovation of the McNulty-Haddick building created additional classroom space for Allied Health and Fine Arts.
In 2000, another successful bond election led to expansion of the campus by more than 33 percent with the addition in 2002 of a new Advanced Technology Center (library). Parking was also expanded and beautification efforts including a central courtyard, covered walks, and landscaping were completed.
In 2003, Technical-Vocational Building a received major renovation, including the construction of a Cisco Academy.
In October 2004, the College completed the renovation to the old library into a Student Center with game room, Cyber Café, Bayer Conference Center, Enterprise Gallery, Security office, and student club offices.  In December 2004, the College finished renovation to the old gym, which now provides offices, swimming pool, weight room and other facilities.
In 2008, Lee College began construction of its showcase Performing Arts Center, which opened in 2009 and today hosts a variety of campus and community events.
In 2012, a paper by former honor student Celeste Butler earned the school a historical marker dedication.

==Academic programs==

Lee College offers roughly eighty programs including:

==Athletics==

Lee College is home to the Running Rebels Men's Basketball and Women's Volleyball. The school competes in the Region XIV Athletic Conference of the NJCAA.
The College has shown its commitment to athletic excellence with the construction of new facilities over the past few years.
In 2002, a completely new tennis complex was constructed adjacent to the campus.
In 2003, the College opened a new Wellness Center and Sports Complex. The complex contains Lee College Arena, the home arena for basketball and volleyball. The arena has a capacity of 1,500 for athletic events.
In 2007, the women's tennis team won the NJCAA National Championship.  This was their second national championship title, the first coming in 2001. Intercollegiate tennis is no longer played at Lee College.

==Administration==

Joseph Hugh Allen (1940–2008), a former member of the Texas House of Representatives graduated from Lee College and served on its board of regents.

==References==

==External links==


