[[United Empire Loyalist]]

CATEGORIES: Social history of Canada, United Empire Loyalists, Monarchy in Canada, Military history of Nova Scotia

The name United Empire Loyalists (a term that has largely gone out of use and been replaced with 'Loyalists') is an honorific given by the British government to those American Loyalists who resettled in British North America and other British Colonies during or after the American Revolution. They settled in what was initially Quebec (including the Eastern Townships) and modern-day Ontario, where they received land grants of [tpl]convert|200|acre|ha|0[/tpl] per person, and in Nova Scotia (including modern-day New Brunswick). Their arrival marked the beginning of a predominantly English-speaking population in the future Canada west and east of the Quebec border.  

==Origins==

During the American Revolution, a significant proportion of the population of New York, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Virginia, North Carolina, Georgia, East Florida, West Florida, and other colonies remained loyal to the Crown. Many Loyalist refugees made the difficult overland trek into Canada after losing their homes, property, and security during the Revolution. The motto of New Brunswick, created out of Nova Scotia for loyalist settlement, is Spem reduxit ("Hope restored").
Many of the Loyalist refugees had fought for the British during the Revolutionary War. Land in Canada was sometimes allotted to Loyalist refugees according to which Loyalist regiment a man had fought in.  See Loyalists Fighting in the American Revolution#The fate of the Tories. 
Following the end of the Revolution and the signing of the Treaty of Paris in 1783, Loyalist soldiers and civilians were evacuated from New York and resettled in other colonies of the British Empire, most notably in Canada.  The two colonies of Nova Scotia (including modern-day New Brunswick), received about 33,000 Loyalist refugees;Censuses of Canada 1665 to 1871: Upper Canada & Loyalists (1785 to 1797). Statcan.gc.ca (2008-10-22). Retrieved on 2013-07-24. Prince Edward Island 2,000; and Quebec (including the Eastern Townships and modern-day Ontario) received some 10,000 refugees. An unknown but substantial number of refugees were unable to establish themselves in British North America and eventually returned to the United States.Retrieved from http://www.loyalistsatshelburne.com/loyalist-history.php. Many in Canada continued to maintain close ties with relatives in the United States, and as well conducted commerce across the border without much regard to British trade laws.Rees, 2000
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grand_Union_Flag
American loyalist flag

==Accommodation==

The arrival of the Loyalists after the Revolutionary War led to the division of Canada into the provinces of Upper Canada (what is now southern Ontario) and Lower Canada (what is now southern Quebec).  They arrived and settled in groups of ethnicity and religion."A Short History of the United Empire Loyalists", by Ann Mackenzie, M.A., United Empire Loyalists Association of Canada, accessed 8 Feb 2010
Loyalists soon petitioned the government to be allowed to use the British legal system they were accustomed to in the American colonies, rather than the French system still in place after the fall of Quebec to Great Britain.  The creation of Upper and Lower Canada allowed most Loyalists to live under British laws and institutions, while the French-speaking population of Lower Canada could maintain their familiar French civil law and the Catholic religion.
Realising the importance of some type of recognition, on November 9, 1789, Lord Dorchester, the governor of Quebec and Governor General of British North America, declared "that it was his Wish to put the mark of Honour upon the Families who had adhered to the Unity of the Empire"."Dorchester Proclamation", Archives, Rootsweb  As a result of Dorchester's statement, the printed militia rolls carried the notation:
 
 "Those Loyalists who have adhered to the Unity of the Empire, and joined the Royal Standard before the Treaty of Separation in the year 1783, and all their Children and their Descendants by either sex, are to be distinguished by the following Capitals, affixed to their names: U.E. Alluding to their great principle The Unity of the Empire."

Thousands of Iroquois and other pro-British Native Americans were expelled from New York and other states and resettled in Canada.  The descendants of one such group of Iroquois, led by Joseph Brant Thayendenegea, settled at Six Nations of the Grand River, the largest First Nations Reserve in Canada.  Another smaller group of Iroquois led by Captain John Deserontyon Odeserundiye,  settled on the shores of the Bay of Quinte in modern day Southeastern Ontario.[tpl]Citation needed|date=September 2010[/tpl]
The government settled numerous Black Loyalists in Nova Scotia, but they faced discrimination and inadequate support.  The government was slow to survey their land (which meant they could not settle) and awarded them smaller grants in less convenient locations than those of white settlers."Black Loyalists in New Brunswick, 1783-1853", Atlantic Canada Portal, University of New Brunswick, accessed 8 Feb 2010  When Great Britain set up the colony of Sierra Leone in Africa, many Black Loyalists emigrated there for what they perceived to be the opportunity of self-government, and established Freetown.[tpl]Citation needed|date=September 2010[/tpl]
Numerous Loyalists were forced to abandon substantial amounts of property in the United States.  Restoration or compensation for this lost property was a major issue during the negotiation of the Jay Treaty in 1795.  Negotiations settled on the concept of the United States negotiators 'advising' the US Congress to provide restitution. For the British, this concept carried significant legal weight, far more than it did to the Americans; the U. S. Congress declined to accept the advice.

==Slavery==

Slave-owning Loyalists from across the former Thirteen Colonies brought their slaves with them as slavery was also legal in Canada. Some 2000 slaves arrived in British North America: Some 500 in Upper Canada (Ontario), some 300 in Lower Canada (Quebec) and 1200 in the Maritime colonies of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island. The presence and condition of slaves in the Maritimes would become a particular issue, because of their larger number and the lack of plantation agriculture. In due course many would be freed and returned to Africa, together with existing freedmen, to be re-settled yet again, this time in the designated colony for freedmen, Sierra Leone. Meanwhile an imperial law in 1790 assured prospective immigrants to Canada that their slaves would remain their property. From 1793, the trade in, but not the possession of, slaves was abolished in the colony of Upper Canada. The trade in slaves was abolished across the British Empire in 1807 and the abolition of possession was completed across the Empire in 1834. Most Black Loyalists were free, however, having been given their freedom from slavery by fighting for the British or joining British lines during the Revolution.  The government also helped them resettle in Canada, transporting nearly 3500 free blacks to New Brunswick.Patrick Bode, "Upper Canada, 1793: Simcoe and the Slaves." Beaver 1993 73(3): 17-19

==War of 1812==

The British government transported to New Brunswick and settled about 400 of 3,000 former slaves from the United States whom they freed during and after the War of 1812.  It made promises to them similar to those made to slaves during the Revolution: to grant them freedom if they left slaveholders and fought with the British.  Enslaved African Americans risked considerable danger crossing to British lines to achieve freedom.  They moved to a new nation and frontier to make it happen. "Black Loyalists in New Brunswick, 1789-1853", Atlantic Canada Portal, University of New Brunswick, accessed 8 Feb 2010 The War of 1812 today is considered a great victory in Canada and Ontario's highway 405 in Niagara has been dedicated in honour of Isaac Brock as the Sir Isaac Brock Parkway, who played an early but vital role in the defeat of the American invaders along the Niagara border.  Brock died in battle, and Brock's Monument in Queenston, Ontario was built to his memory.  It is one of the oldest memorials in Ontario.

==Today==

Modern-day descendants of those original refugees may employ the term "United Empire Loyalist", sometimes using "U.E." as postnominal letters (the honorific is not part of the official Canadian honours system but was an attempt to recognise the sacrifices of the Loyalists).United Empire Loyalist-List, Rootsweb  The practice is uncommon today, even in the original Loyalist strongholds like southeastern Ontario, but historians and genealogists still use it extensively as a kind of shorthand for identifying the ancestry of particular families.[tpl]Citation needed|date=September 2010[/tpl]
The influence of the Loyalists on the evolution of Canada remains evident.  Their ties with Britain and their antipathy to the United States provided the strength needed to keep Canada independent and distinct in North America.  The Loyalists' basic distrust of republicanism and "mob rule" influenced Canada's gradual, "paper-strewn" path to independence.  In effect, the new British North American provinces of Upper Canada (the forerunner of Ontario) and New Brunswick were created as places of refuge for the United Empire Loyalists. The mottoes of the two provinces reflect this history:  Ontario's motto is Ut incepit fidelis sic permanet ("Loyal she began, loyal she remains"); New Brunswick's, Spem Reduxit ("Hope restored").
The word "Loyalist" appears frequently in school, street, and business names in such Loyalist-settled communities as Belleville, Ontario.  The nearby city of Kingston, established as a Loyalist stronghold, was named in honour of King George III. And on the outskirts of that city is a township named simply "Loyalist".
In 1996, Canadian politicians Peter Milliken (a descendant of American Loyalists) and John Godfrey sponsored the Godfrey-Milliken Bill, which would have entitled Loyalist descendants to reclaim ancestral property in the United States which had been confiscated during the American Revolution.  The bill, which did not pass the House of Commons, was intended primarily as a satirical response to the contemporaneous American Helms-Burton Act.The Godfrey-Milliken Bill - A Canadian response to the Helms-Burton Law, Sam Boskey, October 29, 1996
In 1997, the Legislative Assembly of Ontario passed a bill declaring June 19, "United Empire Loyalist Day" in the province of Ontario. United Empire Loyalists are also remembered in the province's motto, "Loyal she began, loyal she remains", which can also be found on the province of Ontario's Coat of Arms.
On 1 July 1934 Canada Post issued 'United Empire Loyalists, 1776-1784' designed by Robert Bruce McCracken based on a sculpture "United Empire Loyalists" by Sydney March. The 10¢ stamps are perforated 11 and were printed by British American Bank Note Company.Canada Post stamp

==Heraldry==

In Canadian heraldry, Loyalist descendants are entitled to use a Loyalist coronet in their coat of arms.[tpl]dead link|date=July 2013[/tpl]http://www.uelac.org/UELAC-history/Cdn-Heraldic-Authority-Gazette-1990.pdf

File:Loyalists military coronet.svg|Loyalists military coronet
File:Loyalists civil coronet.svg|Loyalists civil coronet

==List of Loyalist settlements in present-day Canada==

18th-century names are listed first, alongside their present-day equivalents.

==See also==

==References==

==Further reading==

===Primary sources===

==External links==


