[[Richard Adeney]]

CATEGORIES: British flautists, British classical flautists, 1920 births, 2010 deaths, British conscientious objectors, Alumni of the Royal College of Music

Richard Gilford Adeney (1920 – 16 December 2010) was a British flautist who played principal flute with the London Philharmonic Orchestra and the English Chamber Orchestra, was a soloist and a founding member of the Melos Ensemble.

==Biography==

Richard Adeney was born the son of the painter Bernard Adeney (1878–1966).Biography Brimstone PressList of artistsBernard Adeney Tate Archive He was determined early in life, to "become the best flute player in the world", as he stated in his autobiography.Autobiography He was educated at Dartington Hall School and subsequently studied at the Royal College of Music, where one of his contemporaries and close friends was Malcolm Arnold, who composed in 1940 a Grand Fantasia for flute, trumpet and piano for him and a pianist, premiered in February 1941.Grand Fantasia In his student days in the late 1930s Adeney worked with Vaughan Williams and Sir Malcolm Sargent.review of flute Ralph Blumenau, quote: pretty well every great musician is there. The book is illustrated with many superb photographs of these artists, many of them taken by Adeney himself. During the Second World War he was a conscientious objector.
He joined the London Philharmonic Orchestra in 1941, initially as second flute, and played with them until 1950 and again from 1961 to 1970, under such conductors as Henry Wood and Wilhelm Furtwängler.review of flute Garry Humphreys, September 2009 He was one of the founding members of the Melos Ensemble,Melos Ensemble principal flautist of the English Chamber Orchestra (ECO) until the 1970s when he was succeeded by William Bennett,English Chamber Orchestra news of 21 July 2009, fluteInterview William Bennett Rodney Newton, quote: Geoffrey Gilbert and Richard Adeney were the players I was fascinated by. Richard, because he had colours that nobody else made on the flute. and also regularly performed as a soloist. Malcolm Arnold composed a Divertimento for Flute, Oboe and Clarinet for him and other particular friends. Richard Adeney, Sidney Sutcliffe and Stephen Waters gave the work its first performance in 1952.Malcolm Arnold about this album In 1954 Malcolm Arnold wrote a Concerto for Flute and Strings for his friend,Flute Concerto in Malcolm Arnold biography quote: Arnold long held that music was "a social act of communication among people, a gesture of friendship, the strongest there is", and his concertos were nearly always written for specific soloists who also happened to be his personal friends. ... Concerto for Flute and Strings (for Richard Adeney, 1954) who recorded it in 1979, together with the concerto for flute and orchestra (1972).Recording of Malcolm Arnold flute concertos review: Rob Barnett, November 2006, quote: "They were both written for Richard Adeney; one in 1954; the other at his insistence in 1972. By the way Adeney was also the dedicatee of the Flute Sonatina. ... You can hear Adeney in both concertos on EMI Classics 0946 3 70563 2 5 only recently (2006) reissued. ... There’s little between Adeney and Jones though in the Second Concerto I thought Adeney was a shade more soulful.Interview Malcolm Arnold quote: "but of course Richard Adeney was a wonderful exponent of both my flute concertos"
Richard Adeney was closely associated with Benjamin Britten, and performed in many performances and recordings of the composer's works, notably in 1962 with the Melos Ensemble in the premiere and recording of the War Requiem that Britten conducted himself. He participated in the premiere and first recording of Britten's Curlew River in 1964.Curlew River He recalled: "Curlew River had more rehearsal time than any other new work that I have ever played"[tpl]cn|date=September 2013[/tpl] In 1967 he participated in a concert in the Royal Albert Hall including Britten's The Burning Fiery Furnace.The Burning Fiery Furnace
Richard Adeney performed in notable recordings, such as Johann Sebastian Bach's Brandenburg Concertos, which was recorded under Britten's baton, or in his St Matthew Passion conducted by David Willcocks.St. Matthew Passion in English, sound tracks He premiered the Elegy for flute, harp and string orchestra by John Veale in 1951.Obituary John Veale With the Melos Ensemble he recorded chamber music for both woodwinds and strings, such as Ravel's Introduction and Allegro along with Osian Ellis (harp), Gervase de Peyer (clarinet), Emanuel Hurwitz and Ivor McMahon (violin), Cecil Aronowitz (viola) and Terence Weil (cello).Melos Ensemble – Music among Friends EMI both 1961 and 1967.Maurice Ravel (1875–1937) William Hedley, musicweb-international.com 2009French Chamber Music. Members of the Melos Ensemble Gramophone 1983
Adeney performed regularly at the Aldeburgh Festival. After having played under conductors as Sergiu Celibidache, Bruno Walter, Sir Thomas Beecham and Claudio Abbado, he ended his professional career in 1990.
Adeney died on 16 December 2010 in Paddington.[tpl]Cite web|url= http://announcements.thetimes.co.uk/obituaries/timesonline-uk/obituary.aspx?n=richard-adeney&pid=147587874|title=Richard ADENEY Obituary|work=announcements.thetimes.co.uk|accessdate=4 January 2011[/tpl]
A concert to celebrate his life was held on 6 May 2011 including performances by his colleague William Bennett.

==Teacher, Writer, Photographer, Samaritan==

Richard Adeney has also been a teacher. In 1948 he was teaching courses of the first Bath Assembly (later called Bath International Music Festival).Obituary Dame Ruth King He contributed to the biography of Malcolm Arnoldreview biography of Malcolm Arnold and is the author of flute, his autobiography. A sample provided by the publisher refers to working with Koussevitzky on the Symphony No. 4 by Brahms, musing on the state of mind of the player in the performance. Richard Adeney has also been a photographer whose photos appear on record covers and illustrate his autobiography and other memories,[tpl]cn|date=October 2013[/tpl] also other books.Previn, André: Orchestra Interviews by Michael Foss. 223 pages with many photographs by Richard Adeney. Macdonald and Janes, London, 1979 One of his pictures showing Britten and the harpist Ellis appears in the Britten-Pears Foundation pages.Photo Adeney For twenty-five years he was a volunteer with The Samaritans.

==Publications==

==Selected recordings and broadcasts==

==References==

==External links==


