[[Luca Giordano]]

CATEGORIES: 1634 births, 1705 deaths, People from Naples, 17th-century Italian painters, 18th-century Italian painters, Italian printmakers, Neapolitan painters, Italian Baroque painters, Court painters

Luca Giordano (18 October 1634 – 12 January 1705) was an Italian late Baroque painter and printmaker in etching. Fluent and decorative, he worked successfully in Naples and Rome, Florence and Venice, before spending a decade in Spain.

==Early life and training==

Born in Naples, Giordano was the son of the painter Antonio Giordano.Painting in Naples 1606-1705, p.68 In around 1650 he was apprenticed to Ribera.Painting in Naples 1606-1705, p.51. on the recommendation of the viceroy of Naples. and his early work was heavily influenced by his teacher. Like Ribera, he painted many half-length figures of philosophers, either imaginary portraits of specific figures, or generic types.Painting in Naples 1606-1705, p.169.  He acquired the nickname of Luca Fà-presto (Luca Work-fast). His speed, in design as well as handiwork, and his versatility, which enabled him to imitate other painters deceptively, earned for him two other epithets, "The Thunderbolt" (Fulmine) and "The Proteus" of painting.
Following a period studying in Rome, Parma and Venice, Giordano developed an elaborate Baroque style fusing Venetian and Roman Influences. His mature work combines the ornamental pomp of Paul Veronese with the lively complex schemes, the "grand manner", of Pietro da Cortona. He is also noted for his lively and showy use of colour.

==Florence==

In  1682-83 Giordano he painted various fresco series in Florence, including in the dome of Corsini Chapel of the Chiesa del Carmine. In the large block occupied by the former Medici palace, he painted the ceiling of the Biblioteca Riccardiana (Allegory of Divine Wisdom) and the long gallery of the Palazzo Medici-Riccardi. The vast frescoes of the latter are contained in the 1670s gallery addition, overlooking the gardens. The planning was overseen by Alessandro Segni and commissioned by Francesco Riccardi. They include the prototypic hagiographic celebration of the Medici family in the center, surrounded by a series of interlocking narratives: allegorical figures (the Cardinal Virtues, the Elements of Nature) and mythological episodes (Neptune and Amphitrita, The Rape of Proserpine, The Triumphal procession of Bacchus, The Death of Adonis, Ceres and Triptolemus) http://www.palazzo-medici.it/eng/sez_storia/riccardi.htm.

==Court painter in Spain (1692-1702)==

In 1692 Giordano went to  Spain at the invitation of Charles II. He stayed there for ten years, returning to Naples in 1702, following Charles' death. While in Spain, he painted major decorative schemes at the Buen Retiro Palace, El Escorial, the sacristry of Toledo Cathedral, and other sites. He also painted many pictures for the court, private patrons and churches.Painting in Naples 1606-1705, p.168 His pupils, Aniello Rossi  and Matteo Pacelli, assisted him in Spain. Giordano was popular at the Spanish court, and the king granted him the title of a "caballero".[tpl]Cite EB1911|wstitle=Luca Giordano[/tpl]

==Late work in Naples==

After his return to Naples early in 1702, Giordano continued to paint prolifically.  Executed in a lighter, less rhetorical style, these late works, prefiguring Rococo, proved influential throughout the eighteenth century, and werer admired by Fragonard.
He spent large sums in acts of munificence, and was particularly liberal to poorer artists.  One of his maxims was that the good painter is the one whom the public like, and that the public are attracted more by colour than by design.
