[[The Bugaloos]]

CATEGORIES: 1970s American television series, 1970 American television series debuts, 1972 American television series endings, American children's television series, American comedy television series, American rock music groups, Fictional insects, Fictional musical groups, Musical groups established in 1970, NBC network shows, Television series by Sid and Marty Krofft Television Productions, Television series by CBS Paramount Television, Television programs featuring puppetry

The Bugaloos is an American children's television series, produced by brothers Sidney Krofft and Martin Krofft, that aired on NBC on Saturday mornings from 1970 to 1972. The show featured a musical group composed of four British-accented teenagers, who lived in fictional Tranquility Forest. They wore insect-themed outfits with antennae and wings which allowed them to fly, though on occasion, they were shown flying on surfboards.  They were constantly beset by the evil machinations of Benita Bizarre, played by comedienne Martha Raye. Bizarre, being untalented and ugly herself, was covetous of the Bugaloos' musical prowess.CD liner notes: Saturday Mornings: Cartoons’ Greatest Hits, 1995 MCA Records

==Production and airing==

Touted as the British version of The Monkees, The Bugaloos attracted more than 5,000 young actors and actresses to audition for the show's four lead roles, each having to demonstrate aptitude in dance, singing, and acting. Among those auditioning in spring 1970 were Elton John's future manager John Reid, and Phil Collins, who joined the art-rock band Genesis later that year.Dave Itzkoff. "A Band With the Life Span of an Ant." The New York Times, July 30, 2006, page 28, column 1.Phil Collins listing on imdb.com http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0002015/otherworks (Accessed October 17, 2007) 
Reid and Collins had been two of the three finalists for the role of "I.Q." given to Scottish musician John McIndoe. "If one of those guys had gotten it instead of me, rock-'n'-roll history might have changed," McIndoe later joked. "Whenever I see them, I say, 'Hey guys, you were lucky you didn't get the part.'"Mike Hughes. "Phil Collins on 'Live By Request.'" The Seattle Times, October 1, 1998, page E4.
The show was taped in Los Angeles, California. Seventeen episodes of the series were produced. Like its predecessor H.R. Pufnstuf (1969), The Bugaloos ran for only one season (1970–1971), with reruns airing the following year (1971–1972). Following production of the first, and only, season, the Kroffts tried shooting for a second season, and also had a movie deal in the works with Columbia Pictures. However, miscommunication between the Kroffts and the actors resulted in them returning to England that summer against the Kroffts' wishes. As a result, a potential second season was ultimately scrapped, along with plans for a movie which was shelved due to the bankruptcy of Columbia Pictures.[tpl]citation needed|date=August 2013[/tpl]
Like most children's television shows of the era, The Bugaloos contained a laugh track. Cast members John Philpott and Caroline Ellis discussed its usage while viewing an episode of the show for DVD commentary.

==Characters==

Actor / Character Name / Role In the Band
Supporting characters were:
Though peace-loving and hippie-like, The Bugaloos were pursued by an ugly, evil, jealous old crone named Benita Bizarre (Martha Raye) who lived in a gigantic jukebox, and used it to broadcast her own brand of blaring, obnoxious, unpleasant "music." A dreadful singer, she was furious at the popularity of The Bugaloos's more melodic, upbeat sound, and she plotted elaborate, unsuccessful schemes to destroy or enslave them. 
Benita was aided by two bumbling henchmen, the anthropomorphic speakers Woofer and Tweeter (Joy Campbell and Van Snowden), and her chauffeur and chief flunky, the German-accented Funky Rat (Sharon Baird). She frequently made use of a powerful ultrasonic weapon called the Stereo Zapper, which could render its victim unconscious in seconds.
Raye also appeared the same year in the HR Pufnstuf movie as the Head Witch. The Funky Rat costume was also used for essentially the same role (the Head Witch's Chauffeur).
Voice Characterizations for the various characters in the series were provided by Joan Gerber and Walker Edmiston.

==Music==

The show's music director was Hal Yoergler, who also wrote many of the show's songs and produced the album, The Bugaloos, released in 1970. The title song's lyrics were written by Norman Gimbel, and its music was composed by Charles Fox. Gimbel and Fox were also the songwriters of "Killing Me Softly with His Song" and the theme songs to films and programs such as Last American Hero ("I Got A Name," sung by Jim Croce), Happy Days, Laverne and Shirley, and The New Adventures of Wonder Woman. A cover of the Bugaloos theme performed by Collective Soul is included on the 1995 tribute album Saturday Morning: Cartoons' Greatest Hits, produced by Ralph Sall for MCA Records.
The Bugaloos released an album in 1970 (Capitol Records ST-621), featuring studio-recorded versions of some of the songs performed on the show. The track list is as follows:
Side 1
Side 2
One single was released in conjunction with the album: "For a Friend"/"The Senses of Our World" (Capitol 2946). "For a Friend" charted as a minor hit.  Billboard Bubbling Under week of December 18th 1970 #118 for one week.
The track "Just the Memory Stays Around" did not appear in any episode, and is available only on the LP.  The LP was re-released on CD in January 2000 by Vivid Sound in Japan and in 2006 by Cherry Red Records of London.
The Bugaloos recorded 15 songs. In addition to the 11 that appear on the released album, four additional songs appeared on the television show, but remain unreleased:

==Episode list==

==DVD Release==

The complete Bugaloos series was released on DVD in May 2006 by Rhino Entertainment. The set contained all seventeen episodes, with audio commentary on the pilot episode from creator Sid Krofft and director Tony Charmoli.  Cast members John Philpott, Caroline Ellis, and John McIndoe also provided audio commentary on some episodes and participated in interviews.  Also included were a video jukebox with a selection of songs from the episodes, a photo gallery, and a Bugaloos Interactive I. Q. Test, hosted by John "I. Q." McIndoe.

==Notes==

==External links==


