[[Mahone Bay (town)]]

CATEGORIES: General Service Areas in Nova Scotia, Communities in Lunenburg County, Nova Scotia, Towns in Nova Scotia

 
Mahone Bay is a town located on the northwest shore of Mahone Bay along the South Shore of Nova Scotia in Lunenburg County.

==History==

Mahone Bay was first settled during Father Le Loutre's War. The first to arrive were  those who lived in Lunenburg, Nova Scotia and had farm lots throughout the peninsula,  including Mahone Bay.  The people who settled on the Lunenburg Peninsula, including the present-day village of Mahone Bay, were foreign protestants who were German, Swiss, and Montbéliardais settlers.Among the settlers were the Hyson, Zwicker, Keddy, Eisenhauer/Eisner, Weinacht/Whynot, Ernst, and Veinot families.  All these names can be found in the area today.  The old cemetery, known as Bayview Cemetery, has some 18th-century slate gravestones engraved in German.
During the French and Indian War (which included the Expulsion of the Acadians), there were nine Native and Acadian (Catholic) raids against the protestant settlers on the Lunenburg Peninsula.  The French, Acadians and natives were resisting the British control over Nova Scotia and Acadia. One such raid – the Raid on Lunenburg (1756) – happened just off the shores of Mahone Bay on present-day Covey Island and John Rous Island.
Another raid happened on 24 August 1758 in the village of Mahone Bay, when eight Mi'kmaq attacked the family homes of Lay and Brant. While they killed three people in the raid, the Mi'kmaq were unsuccessful in taking their scalps, which was the common practice for payment from the French.
During the War of 1812, the American privateer schooner Young Teazer was trapped off the shores of Mahone Bay  by the HMS Hogue (1811).  To avoid capture, a crew member of the Young Teazer destroyed his own ship, killing most of the crew.Archibald MecMechan. Sagas of the Sea. 
The town prospered with wooden shipbuilding in the 19th century. While shipbuilding decline with the arrival of steel and steam vessels, Mahone Bay became known for its boatbuilding. World War I and II brought brief revivals of shipbuilding with construction of schooners, tugs and barges. After the war, the ship yard became known for innovative production of moulded plywood boats.

==Today==

The town is also known for a history of wooden boat building, it was the main industry of Mahone Bay in its earlier years. The Settler's Museum explains and shows this history in detail. Until recent years the town's shipbuilding and boatbuilding heritage was celebrated by the "Mahone Bay Wooden Boat Festival".
The view across the harbour is of three prominent churches: St James' Anglican; St John's Evangelical Lutheran; and Trinity United. It has become an iconic image of Nova Scotia, frequently photographed and featured on postcards and calendars.  The town has a number of upscale shops and restaurants which almost universally are designed to appeal to the tourist trade, and sometimes shut down during the winter months.[tpl]Citation needed|date=November 2007[/tpl] The town also has a plastics factory.

==References==

==External links==


