[[Fan Chung]]

CATEGORIES: 1949 births, 20th-century mathematicians, Living people, American mathematicians, Combinatorialists, Graph theorists, People from Kaohsiung, Taiwanese emigrants to the United States, University of California, San Diego faculty, University of Pennsylvania alumni, Women mathematicians, Fellows of the American Mathematical Society

Fan-Rong King Chung Graham (金芳蓉, pinyin: Jīn Fāngróng) (born October 9, 1949), known professionally as Fan Chung, is a mathematician who works mainly in the areas of spectral graph theory, extremal graph theory and  random graphs, in particular in generalizing the Erdős–Rényi model for graphs with general degree distribution
(including power-law graphs in the study of large information networks).

==Life==

Since 1998 Chung has been the Akamai Professor in Internet Mathematics at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD). She received her doctorate from the University of Pennsylvania in 1974, under the direction of Herbert Wilf. After working at Bell Laboratories and Bellcore for nineteen years, she joined the faculty of the University of Pennsylvania as the first female tenured professor in mathematics. She serves on the editorial boards of more than a dozen international journals. Since 2003 she has been the editor-in-chief of Internet Mathematics. She has given invited lectures in many conferences, including the International Congress of Mathematicians in 1994, and a plenary lecture on the mathematics of PageRank at the 2008 Annual meeting of the American Mathematical Society.  She was selected to be a Noether Lecturer in 2009.
Chung has two children, the first born during her graduate studies, from her first marriage.UCSD Math department profile of Dr. ChungUniversity of St Andrews Math department biography of Chung Since 1983 she has been married to the mathematician Ronald Graham. They were close friends of the mathematician Paul Erdős, and have both published papers with him – 13 in her case;http://www.nytimes.com/books/first/h/hoffman-man.html thus, both have Erdős numbers of 1.
She has published more than 200 research papers and three books:
In 2012 she became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society.List of Fellows of the American Mathematical Society, retrieved 2012-11-10.

==Biography==

Fan Chung was born in 9th Oct. 1949 in KaoShiong, Taiwan. Under the influence of her father, an engineer, Fan Chung started to be interested in mathematics, especially in the area of combinatorics in high school in Kaoshiung. She became interested in the problems of combinatorics. After high school, Fan Chung went to the National Taiwan University to start her career in mathematics formally. While Fan Chung was an undergraduate, she was surrounded by many women mathematicians. They talked about the mathematics and helped each other. Seeing more and more women doing well in mathematics also encouraged Fan Chung to study mathematics.
After graduating from National Taiwan University with a B.S. in mathematics, Fan Chung went to University of Pennsylvania to pursue a career in mathematics. There she obtained the highest score in the qualifying exam by a wide margin, raising such head's as Herbert Wilf's, who would eventually become her doctoral advisor. Wilf suggested Ramsey Theory as a subject Fan Chung could work on. During the a single week studying material Fan Chung had come up with new proofs for established results in the field. Prof. Wilf said: “My eyes were bulging. I was very excited. I asked her to go to the blackboard and show me. What she wrote was incredible! In just one week, from a cold start, she had a major result in Ramsey theory. I told her she had just done two-thirds of a doctoral dissertation.” http://www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/~history/Biographies/Chung.html
Fan Chung was awarded a M.S. in 1972 and a Ph.D. two years later. By this time, Fan Chung was married and had already given birth to her first child. The same year she received her Ph.D. Fan Chung started working for the Mathematical Foundations of Computing Department at Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, New Jersey. The position at Bell Laboratories was an opportunity to work with other excellent mathematicians, but also it contributed to her mathematical world powerfully. She published many impressive mathematical papers and published many joint papers with Ron Graham.
After twenty years of work at Bell Laboratories and Bellcore, Fan Chung decided to go back University of Pennsylvania to become a professor of mathematics. In 1998, Fan Chung was named Distinguished Professor of Mathematics at University of California, San Diego. To date, Fan Chung has over 200 publications to her name. The two best known books are Spectral Graph Theory and Erdos on Graphs. Spectral Graph Theory studies how the spectrum of the Laplacian of a graph is related to its combinatorial properties. Erdos on Graphs, which was jointly written by Fan Chung and Ron Graham, studies studies many of Paul Erdős problems and conjectures in graph theory. Beyond her contributions to graph theory, Fan Chung has used her knowledge to connect different fields of science. As she wrote in "Graph Theory in the Information Age",

==Fan Chung and Bell Laboratories==

In 1974, Fan Chung graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and became a member of Technical Staff working for the Mathematical Foundations of Computing Department at Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, New Jersey. She worked under Henry Pollak. During this time, Fan Chung collaborated with many leading mathematicians who work for Bell Laboratories such as Ron Graham.
In 1975, Fan Chung published her first joint paper with Ron Graham on Multicolor Ramsey Numbers for Complete Bipartite Graphs  which was published in the Journal of Combinatorial Theory.
In 1983 the Bell Telephone Company was split up. Since Henry Pollak joined and became head of a research unit within a new company, he asked Fan Chung to become Research Manager. Until 1990, Fan Chung was one of the first to receive a fellowship to spend a sabbatical at a university. She supervised many mathematicians in the unit.
According to Fan Chung's words, although people respect her because of the power to make decisions with positions in management, she prefers to be respected because of her achievement in mathematics. Since then, she has returned to the academic world.J J O'Connor and E F Roberson, Fan Rong K Chung Graham, web, www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/~history/biographies/Chung.html.

==Fan Chung and Ron Graham==

Fan Chung's first marriage ended in divorce in 1982. However, when Fan Chung worked at Bell Laboratories, she met Ronald Graham. During that time, they became close friends and published many joint papers in graph theory, eventually marrying in 1983. In Paul Hoffman's book The Man Who Loved Only Numbers, regarding his marriage with Chung, Graham said:
In 1998, Graham and Chung co-wrote the book Erdős on Graphs.

==Fan Chung and spectral graph theorem==

Among Fan Chung's publications, her contributions to spectral graph theory are important to this area of graph theory. From the first publications about undirected graphs to recent publications about the directed graphs, Fan Chung creates the solid base in the spectral graph theory to the future graph theorist.
Spectral graph theory as one of the most important theory in graph theory combines the algebra and graph perfectly. Algebraic methods treat many types of graphs efficiently. According to the biography Fan Rong K Chung Graham, "Spectral graph theory studies how the spectrum of the Laplacian of a graph is related to its combinatorial properties."'.
In 1997, the American Mathematical Society published Fan Chung's book Spectral graph theory. This book became a standard textbook at many universities and is the key to study Spectral graph theory for many mathematics students who are interested in this area. Fan Chung’s study in the spectral graph theory brings this “algebraic connectivity” of graphs into a new and higher level.

==Awards and honors==

Fan Chung won the Allendoerfer Award of the Mathematical Association of America in 1990 and received the membership of the American Academy of Arts and Science in 1998.
Fan Chung also served on many journals and committees.

==References==

==Sources==

==External links==



