[[Joris Ivens]]

CATEGORIES: 1898 births, 1989 deaths, Dutch communists, Lenin Peace Prize recipients, Dutch documentary filmmakers, Dutch film directors, People from Nijmegen, Propaganda film directors

Joris Ivens (18 November 1898, Nijmegen – 28 June 1989, Paris) was a Dutch documentary filmmaker and communist.

==Early life and career==

Born Georg Henri Anton Ivens[tpl]cite news |title=Joris Ivens, 90, Dutch Documentary Film Maker |first=Peter |last=Flint |newspaper=New York Times |date= 30 June 1989|url= http://www.nytimes.com/1989/06/30/obituaries/joris-ivens-90-dutch-documentary-film-maker.html[/tpl] into a wealthy family, Ivens went to work in one of his father's photo supply shops and from there developed an interest in film. He completed his first film at 13; in college he studied economics with the goal of continuing his father's business, but an interest in class issues distracted him from that path. He met photographer Germaine Krull in Berlin in 1923, and entered into a marriage of convenience with her between 1927 and 1943 so that Krull could hold a Dutch passport and could have a "veneer of married respectability without sacrificing her autonomy."Sichel, Kim. Germaine Krull: Photographer of Modernity. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1999. Pages 41 and 70.  ISBN 0-262-19401-5.
Originally his work focused on technique - some argue that it had that focus at the cost of relevance, especially in Rain (Regen, 1929), a 10-minute short filmed over 2 years which features impressive cinematography and a number of 'characters' but no information about them aside from what was visible, and in The Bridge  (De Brug, 1928), which showed a frank admiration of engineering and also featured a number of "characters" but again did not give any information about them.  Around this time he was involved in the creation of the Filmliga based in Amsterdam which drew foreign filmmakers to the Netherlands such as Alberto Cavalcanti, René Clair, Sergei Eisenstein, Vsevolod Pudovkin, and Dziga Vertov who also became his friends.
In 1929, Ivens went to the Soviet Union and, to his astonishment, was invited to direct a film on a topic of his own choosing which was the new industrial city of Magnitogorsk.  Before commencing work, he returned to the Netherlands to make Industrial Symphony for Philips Electric which is considered to be a film of great technical beauty.Erik Barnouw. Documentary. New York: Oxford University Press, 2nd revised edition, 1993. pp.: 133-134 He returned to the Soviet Union to make the film about Magnitogorsk, Song of Heroes  in 1931 with music composed by Hanns Eisler. This was the first film where Ivens and Eisler worked together on. It was a propaganda film about this new industrial city.
With Henri Storck, Ivens made Misère au Borinage (Borinage, 1933), a pro-communist documentary on life in a coal mining region. In 1943, he also directed two Allied propaganda films for the National Film Board of Canada, including Action Stations, about the Royal Canadian Navy's escorting of convoys in the Battle of the Atlantic.http://www.nfb.ca/collection/films/resultat.php?type=fonction&idFcr=7845&idFct=01&nom=Joris+Ivens&nomfunc=Director

==U.S. and post-World War II career==

From 1936 to 1945, Ivens was based in the United States.  For Pare Lorentz's U.S. Film Service, in the year 1940, he made a documentary film on rural electrification called Power and the Land. It focused on a family, the Parkinsons, who ran a business providing milk for their community. The film showed the problem in the lack of electricity and the way the problem was fixed. Ivens was, however, known for his anti-fascist and other propaganda films, including The Spanish Earth, for the Spanish Republicans, co-written with Ernest Hemingway and music by Marc Blitzstein and Virgil Thomson.  Jean Renoir did the French narration for the film and Hemingway did the English version only after Orson Welles's sounded too theatrical.. This film was financed by Archibald MacLeish, Fredric March, Florence Eldridge, Lillian Hellman, Luise Rainer, Dudley Nichols, Franchot Tone and other Hollywood movie stars, moguls, and writers who composed a group known as the Contemporary Historians.   Spanish Earth  was shown at the White House on July 8, 1937 after Ivens, Hemingway, Martha Gellhorn, had had dinner with President Franklin D. Roosevelt, Eleanor Roosevelt and Harry Hopkins. The Roosevelts loved the film but said that it needed more propaganda.[tpl]citation needed|date=April 2013[/tpl] This 1937 documentary was considered his masterpiece.
In 1938 he traveled to China. The 400 Million (1939) depicted the history of modern China and the Chinese resistance during the Second Sino-Japanese War, including dramatic shots of the Battle of Taierzhuang. Robert Capa did camerawork, Sidney Lumet worked on the film as a reader, Hanns Eisler wrote the musical score, and Fredric March provided the narration. It, too, had been financed by the same people as those of  Spanish Earth.  Its chief fundraiser was Luise Rainer, recipient of the best actress Oscar two years in a row; and the entire group called themselves this time, History Today, Inc . The Guomindang government censored the film, fearing that it would give too much credit to left-wing forces.European Foundation Joris Ivens. Joris Ivens Filmography. The 400 Million Iven was also suspected of being a friend of Mao Zedong and especially Zhou Enlai.Martha Gellhorn. A Memoir: Travels with Myself and Another. New York: Penguin Putnam, Inc, 1978. p.:52
In 1944, Ivens made Know Your Enemy: Japan  for Frank Capra's U.S. War Department film series Why We Fight. The film's commentary was written largely by Carl Foreman.  It was never distributed because Emperor Hirohito had been depicted and wrongly labeled as a war criminal; and as the film was due for release there had been an American government policy shift to keep the Emperor after the war as a means of maintaining order in post-war Japan. A combination of not being in step with the Truman Administration and owing to the emerging 'red scare' on known or suspected Communists by the US government after Roosevelt's death made Ivens leave the United States. Ivens' politics also put the kibosh on his first feature film project which was to have starred Greta Garbo.  In fact, Walter Wanger, the producer, was adamant about "running him {Ivens} out of town {Hollywood}."
In 1946, commissioned to make a Dutch film about Indonesian 'independence', Ivens resigned out of protest of what he considered ongoing imperialism, the Dutch were in his view resisting decolonization, and filmed Indonesia Calling in secret. For around a decade Ivens lived in Eastern Europe, working for several studios there. His position concerning Indonesia and his taking sides for the Eastern Bloc in the Cold War annoyed the Dutch government. Over a period of many years, he was obliged to renew his passport every three or four months. According to later mythology however, he lost his passport for ten years, which is not true - the fact that he would make it back to New York City to sit by the bedside of his old friend Paul Robeson when he was ill would belie that.
From 1965 to 1970 he filmed two propaganda films about North Vietnam during the war: 17e parallèle: La guerre du peuple (17th Parallel: Vietnam in War) and participated in the collective work Loin du Vietnam (Far from Vietnam). He was awarded the Lenin Peace Prize for the year 1967.
From 1971 to 1977, he shot How Yukong Moved the Mountains, a 763-minute propaganda documentary about the Cultural Revolution in China. He was given unprecedented access because of his pro-communist views and his old personal friendships with Zhou Enlai and Mao Zedong.
Ivens was knighted by the Dutch government in 1989, and died on 28 June that year. Shortly before his death he made the last of more than 40 films Une histoire de vent (A Tale of the Wind).

==Notes==

==Further reading==

==External links==


