[[Paul Manship]]

CATEGORIES: American sculptors, Modern sculptors, Art Deco sculptors, Artists from Minnesota, Rockefeller Center, Art Students League of New York faculty, 1885 births, 1966 deaths, Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts alumni, Rome Prize winners, National Academy of Design members

Paul Howard Manship (December 24, 1885 – January 28, 1966) was an American sculptor.

==Life==

thumb|left|Cycle of LifePaul Howard Manship was born in St. Paul, Minnesota, on December 24, 1885, the son of Charles H. and Mary Etta (Friend) Manship. His father, born in Mississippi, was a clerk for the St. Paul gas company, and with his wife, who was born in Pennsylvania, were parents of seven children. Charles and Mary were married in St. Paul, on July 14, 1870, and raised their family in a home they owned at 304 Nelson (later Marshall) Avenue. Paul H. Manship began his art studies at the St. Paul School of Art in Minnesota.  From there he moved to Philadelphia and continued his education at the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts.  Following that he migrated to New York City where he enrolled in the Art Students League of New York, studying anatomy with George Bridgman and modeling under Hermon Atkins MacNeil.  From 1905 to 1907 he served as an assistant to sculptor Solon Borglum and spent the two years after that studying with Charles Grafly and assisting Isidore Konti.
In 1909, at Konti's urging, he entered the competition for, and won, the Rome Prize and shortly thereafter decamped for Rome where he attended the American Academy from 1909 until 1912.  While in Europe he became increasingly interested in Archaic art, his own work began to take on some archaic features, and he became more and more attracted to classical subjects.  He also developed an interest in classical sculpture of India, and traces of that influence can be observed in his work (see "Dancer and Gazelles" in Gallery).  Manship was one of the first artists to become aware of the vast scope of art history being newly excavated at the time and became intensely interested in Egyptian, Assyrian and pre-classical Greek sculpture.
When he returned to America from his European sojourn, Manship found that his style was attractive to both modernists and conservatives.  His simplification of line and detail appealed to those who wished to move beyond the Beaux-Arts classical realism prevalent in the day.  Also, his view of and use of a more traditional "beauty" as well as an avoidance of the more radical and abstract trends in art made his works attractive to more conservative art collectors.  Manship's work is often considered to be a major precursor to Art Deco.
Manship produced over 700 works and always employed assistants of the highest quality.  At least two of them, Gaston Lachaise and Leo Friedlander, went on to create significant places for themselves in the history of American sculpture.
Although not known as a portraitist, he did produce statues and busts of Theodore Roosevelt, Samuel Osgood, John D. Rockefeller, Robert Frost, Gifford Beal and Henry L. Stimson.  Manship was very adept at low relief and used these skills to produce a large number of coins and medals, one of his later ones being the John F. Kennedy inaugural medal.
Manship was chosen by the American Battle Monuments Commission to create monuments following both the First and Second World Wars.  They are located respectively in the American Cemetery at Thiaucourt, France in 1926, and in the military cemetery at Anzio, Italy.
Manship served on the board of the Smithsonian American Art Museum and chaired the board.  Manship was affiliated with the National Academy of Design, the National Sculpture Society, and the American Academy of Arts and Letters.  He served on the U.S. Commission of Fine Arts from 1937 to 1941.  His many honors include a Pierpont Morgan fellowship, a Widener Gold Medal from the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts, and the award of Chevalier from the French Legion of Honor.Thomas E. Luebke, ed., Civic Art:  A Centennial History of the U.S. Commission of Fine Arts (Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Commission of Fine Arts, 2013):  Appendix B, p. 548.  Manship's extensive papers, maquettes and sculptures are housed in the Smithsonian's Archives of American Art. In 2004 the Smithsonian mounted a retrospective of Manship's career which resulted in a reappraisal of the sculptor's work.
There is a gallery dedicated to the display of Manship's work at the Smithsonian American Art Museum.
Manship was father of the artist John Paul Manship (1927–2000).

==Museums with Manship works==

==Public Sculpture==

==Gallery==

File:Girl w duck Rittenhs Sq.jpg| Girl with a duck, 1911, Rittenhouse Square, Philadelphia
File:WLA amart Solome 1915 Paul Manship.jpg|Salome, 1915, Smithsonian American Art Museum, Washington, D.C.
Image:Dancer and Gazelles.JPG|Dancer and Gazelles, 1916, Smithsonian American Art Museum, Washington, D.C.
File:WLA amart 1921 Atalanta.jpg| Atalanta, 1921, Smithsonian American Art Museum, Washington, D.C.
Image:Brookgreen Gardens Sculpture23.jpg|Diana and a Hound, 1924, Brookgreen Gardens, Pawley Island, South Carolina
File:WLA amart Venus by Paul Manship.jpg| Study for Venus Anadyomene, 1924, Smithsonian American Art Museum, Washington, D.C.
File:WLA amart Actaeon.jpg| Actaeon (#1), 1925, Smithsonian American Art Museum, Washington, D.C.
Image:PMYoungLincoln-1.jpg|Young Lincoln or Hoosier Youth, 1932, Fort Wayne, Indiana
Image:PMYoungLincoln-2.jpg|Young Lincoln or Hoosier Youth (detail), 1932, Fort Wayne, Indiana
Image:eveningpaul.jpg|Evening (foreground), 1938, Brookgreen Gardens, Pawley Island, South Carolina

==References==

==External links==


