[[Lysimachus]]

CATEGORIES: 360 BC births, 281 BC deaths, 4th-century BC Greek people, 3rd-century BC Greek people, Somatophylakes, Satraps of the Alexandrian Empire, Trierarchs of Nearchus' fleet, Ancient Macedonian generals, Hellenistic generals, Macedonian monarchs, Ancient Greeks killed in battle, Macedonian monarchs killed in battle, Non-dynastic kings of Macedon, Ancient Thessalians in Macedon, Ancient Pellaeans, Hellenistic Thrace, 3rd-century BC rulers, 4th-century BC rulers, Hellenistic Macedonia, 4th-century BC Macedonians, 3rd-century BC Macedonians

Lysimachus (Greek: Λυσίμαχος, Lysimachos; c. 360 BC – 281 BC) was a Macedonian officer and diadochus (i.e. "successor") of Alexander the Great, who became a basileus ("King") in 306 BC, ruling Thrace, Asia Minor and Macedon.

==Early life and career==

Lysimachus was born in 362/361 BC, as the second son of AgathoclesLund, Lysimachus: A Study in Early Hellenistic Kingship, p.3 and his wife; there is some indication in the historical sources that this wife was perhaps named Arsinoe, and that Lysimachus' paternal grandfather may have been called Alcimachus. His father was a nobleman of high rank who was an intimate friend of Philip II of Macedon, who shared in Philip II’s councils and became a favorite in the Argead court.Lund, Lysimachus: A Study in Early Hellenistic Kingship, p.2 Lysimachus and his brothers grew up with the status of Macedonians; all these brothers enjoyed with Lysimachus prominent positions in Alexander’s circle and, like him, were educated at the Macedonian court in Pella.Heckel, Who’s who in the age of Alexander the Great: prosopography of Alexander’s empire, p.153Lysimachus had an elder brother called Alcimachus of Apollonia and had two younger brothers called Autodicus and Philip. He had two known nephews through his brother Alcimachus called Alcimachus and Philip; his known great-nephew was Lysippus the grandson of his brother Alcimachus and his known sister-in-law was Adeia the wife of Autodicus
He was probably appointed Somatophylax during the reign of Philip II. During Alexander's Persian campaigns, he was one of his immediate bodyguards. In 324 BC, in Susa, he was crowned in recognition for his actions in India.Heckel, Who's Who in the Age of Alexander the Great: Prosopography of Alexander's Empire p.p.153-154. "Near Sangala in India some 1,200 of Alexander's troops were wounded, among them Lysimachus the Somatophylax. He had earlier boarded a thirty-oared vessel at the Hydaspes (in the company of two other Somatophylakes), before the battle with Porus, though his role in the actual battle is not attested; presumably he fought in the immediate vicinity of Alexander himself. When Alexander decided to sail down the Indus river system to the Ocean, Lysimachus was one of those from Pella charged with a trierarchy in the Attic fashion. He is named by Arrian in the only complete list of Somatophylakes. At Susa in spring 324 BC, Lysimachus and the rest of the Somatophylakes were crowned by Alexander, though unlike Leonnatus, Lysimachus appears to have earned no special distinction." After Alexander’s death in 323 BC, he was appointed to the government of Thrace as strategos.Heckel, Who's Who in the Age of Alexander the Great: Prosopography of Alexander's Empire p.155." In 323 Lysimachus was assigned control of Thrace, and was probably strategos rather than satrap. The subordinate position of strategos may account for the failure of the sources to mention Lysimachus in the settlement of Triparadeisus; his brother Autodicus was, however, named as a Somatophylax of Philip III at that time."

==Diadochi==

In 315 BC, he joined Cassander, Ptolemy I Soter and Seleucus I Nicator against Antigonus I Monophthalmus, who, however, diverted his attention by stirring up Thracian and Scythian tribes against him. In 309 BC, he founded Lysimachia in a commanding situation on the neck connecting the Chersonese with the mainland. He followed the example of Antigonus I in taking the title of king.Williams, Henry Smith. Historians History of the World (Volume 4), p.450.
In 306/305 BC, he assumed the title of "King", which he held until his death at Corupedium in 282/1 BC.Heckel, Who's Who in the Age of Alexander the Great: Prosopography of Alexander's Empire, p.155. "In 306 or 305 BC, he assumed the title of "King", which he held until his death at Corupedium in 282/1 BC."
In 302 BC, when the second affiance between Cassander, Ptolemy I and Seleucus I was made, Lysimachus, reinforced by troops from Cassander, entered Asia Minor, where he met with little resistance. On the approach of Antigonus I he retired into winter quarters near Heraclea, marrying its widowed queen Amastris, a Persian princess. Seleucus I joined him in 301 BC, and at the battle of Ipsus Antigonus I was defeated and slain. His dominions were divided among the victors. Lysimachus' share was Lydia, Ionia, Phrygia and the north coast of Asia Minor.
