 p. 74</ref> Alfred called a levy at Ecgbryhtesstan (Egbert's Stone). Many of the men in the counties around ([[Somerset]], [[Wiltshire]], and [[Hampshire]]) who had not already fled rallied to him there.<ref name="g76l26"/> The next day, Alfred's host moved to Iley Oak, and then the day after that to Edington.<ref name="g76l26"/><ref name=smyth26/><ref>'The Hundred of Warminster', [http://www.british-history.ac.uk/report.aspx?compid=16071 A History of the County of Wiltshire: Volume 8: Warminster, Westbury and Whorwellsdown Hundreds (1965)], pp. 1-5. Date accessed: 22 May 2010.</ref> There, on an unknown date between 6 and 12 May,<ref>Smyth. ''King Alfred the Great''. p. 75</ref> they fought the Danes. According to the ''Life'':
After the victory, when the Danes had taken refuge in Chippenham, the West Saxons removed from the area around all food that the Danes might be able to capture in a sortie, and waited. After two weeks, the hungry Danes sued for peace, giving Alfred "preliminary hostages and solemn oaths that they would leave his kingdom immediately", just as usual, but in addition promising that Guthrum would be baptized. The primary difference between this agreement and the treaties at Wareham and Exeter was that Alfred had decisively defeated the Danes at Edington, rather than just stopping them, and therefore it seemed more likely that they would keep to the terms of the treaty.
The primary reason for Alfred's victory was probably the relative size of the two armies. The men of even one shire could be a formidable fighting force, as those of Devon proved in the same year, defeating an army under Ubbe Ragnarsson at the Battle of Cynwit. In addition, in 875 Guthrum had lost the support of other Danish lords, including Ivar and Ubbe. Further Danish forces had settled on the land before Guthrum attacked Wessex: in East Anglia, and in Mercia between the treaty at Exeter and the attack on Chippenham; many others were lost in a storm off Swanage in 876-7, with 120 ships wrecked Internal disunity was threatening to tear the Danes apart, and they needed time to reorganize. Fortunately for Wessex they did not use the time available effectively.

==Location of the battle==

The primary sources for the location of the battle are Asser's Life of King Alfred, which names the place as "Ethandun" and the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, which has Eðandune. The chronicle was compiled during the reign of Alfred the Great and is thus a contemporary record.ASC 878. English translation at Project Gutenberg It is believed that Asser's Life was originally written in 893; however, no contemporary manuscript survives.Keynes/Lapidge. Asser's Life of King Alfred. p. 84 Ch. 56, also a discussion on Asser and the text pp. 48 – 58 A version of the Life written in about 1000 AD, known as the Cotton Otho A. xii text, lasted till 1731 when it was destroyed in a fire. Before its destruction this version had been transcribed and annotated; it is this transcription on which modern translations are based. Some scholars have suggested that Asser's life of King Alfred was a forgery.See Gransden, ''Historical Writing' Ch. 4 for an analysis of the subject.
The location of the battle generally accepted by most present-day historians is at Edington, near Westbury in Wiltshire.Lavelle. Alfred's Wars. pp. 308 –  314   However, the location has been much debated by antiquarians over the centuries.  In 1904 William Henry Stevenson analysed possible sites and said "So far, there is nothing to prove the identity of this Eðandune named in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle with Edington" but then goes on to say that "there can be little reason for questioning it".Stevenson. Assers' life of King Alfred.  p. 273. Retrieved 13 February 2013
The evidence to support the Eðandune of  the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle and the Ethandun of Asser's Life, being Edington, Wiltshire, is derived from a trail of information from various ancient manuscripts.Keynes/ Lapidge. Alfred the Great. pp. 176 – 177 and fn. 90 p. 323Stevenson. Asser's Life of King Alfred: Asserius De Rebus Gestis Ælfredi. p. 45 Ch. 56. Retrieved 13 February 2013  Edington, Wiltshire is  known to have been part of Alfred's family estate. He left a manor called Eðandune to his wife, in his Will.Alfreds' Will S.1507 A charter records a meeting of the king's council at Eðandun, although a later scribe has annotated the same document with Eðandune.Stevenson. The battle of Ethandun in The Athenaeum. Number 4116.  pp. 303-304. Retrieved 29 January 2014Charter S.646 referring to a meeting held at Edington in 957 by the king's councillors In 968, another charter reported that King Edgar had granted land at Edyndon to Romsey Abbey.Charter S.765 giving land from Edington to Romsey Abbey in 968  The Domesday book has an entry for Romsey Abbey holding land at Edendone(Wilt'schire) at the time of Edward the Confessor and also in 1086, and this is known to be at Edington, Wiltshire.Domesday Book entry for Edington, Wiltshire.
Alternatives to Edington, Wiltshire, have been suggested since early times. The Tudor historian Polydore Vergil appears to have misread the ancient texts for the battle site as he places it at Abyndoniam (Abingdon) instead of Edington.Vergil. Anglica Historia. (1555 version). Book V. Ch. 7.(Online Ed.)Lavelle. Alfred's Wars. pp. 306 – 307  In the 19th century there was a resurgence in interest of medieval history and King Alfred was seen as a major hero.Parker. England's Darling. Ch. 3 Although most early historians had sited the battle as in the Edington, Wiltshire area, the significant interest in the subject encouraged many antiquarians to dig up Alfredian sites and also to propose alternatives for the location of the battle.Lavelle. Alfred's Wars. p. 309Parker. England's Darling. pp. 18 – 22 The alternative sites were generally name based, although with the large interest in everything Alfredian in the 19th century, any site that had an Alfred connection could be guaranteed large amounts of tourists, so this was also a driving force to find a link.Lavelle. Alfred's Wars. pp. 311 – 312

==Consequences==

Three weeks after the battle, Guthrum was baptized at Aller with Alfred as sponsor.Asser. Life. ch. 56 It is possible that the enforced conversion was an attempt by Alfred to lock Guthrum into a Christian code of ethics and would ensure the Danes' compliance with any treaties agreed to. The converted Guthrum took the baptismal name of Athelstan.Yorke. Kings and Kingdoms. p. 176 – 177  
Under the terms of the Treaty of Wedmore the converted Guthrum was required to leave Wessex and return to East Anglia. Consequently, in  879, the Viking army  left Chippenham and made their way to Cirencester and remained there for a year.Asser. Life. ch. 57 The following year they went to East Anglia where they settled.Asser. Life. ch. 60 
Also in 879, according to Asser, another Viking army sailed up the River Thames and wintered at Fulham.Asser. Life. ch. 58 Over the next few years this particular Danish faction had several encounters with Alfred's forces. However Alfred managed to contain this threat by reforming his military and setting up a system of fortified cities, known as burghs or burhs. 
In 885 Asser reports that the Viking army that had settled in East Anglia had broken in a most insolent manner the peace they had established with Alfred, although Guthrum is not mentioned.Asser. Life. ch. 72 Guthrum reigned as king, in East Anglia, until his death in 890 and although this period was not always peaceful he was not considered a threat.ASC 890. English translation at Project Gutenberg
In 886, the Treaty of Alfred and Guthrum  defined the boundaries of their two kingdoms. The kingdom of Mercia was divided up with part going to Alfred's Wessex and the other part to Guthrum's East Anglia.The treaty of Alfred and Guthrum in Attenborough's The laws of the earliest English kings. pp. 96-101. Retrieved 28 January 2014 The agreement also defined the social classes of Danish East Anglia and their equivalent in Wessex. It tried to provide a framework that would minimize conflict and regulate commerce between the two peoples.Abels. Alfred the Great: War, Kingship and Culture in Anglo-Saxon England. pp. 165-67 It is not clear how serious Guthrum took his conversion to Christianity, however he was the first of the Danish rulers of the English kingdoms to mint coins, on the Alfredian model, under his baptismal name of Athelstan. By the end of the 9th century all of the Anglo-Danish rulers were minting coins too. By the 10th century the Anglo-Saxon model of kingship seems to have been universally adopted by the Anglo-Danish leadership.
After the defeat of Guthrum at the Battle of Edington, Alfred's reforms to military obligations in Wessex made it increasingly difficult for the Vikings to raid successfully. By 896 the Vikings gave up with some going to East Anglia and others going to Northumbria. It was under Alfred that the Viking threat had been contained.  However, the system of military reforms and the Burghal Hidage introduced by Edward the Elder, enabled Alfred's successors to retake control of the lands occupied in the North of England by the Danes.Horspool. Why Alfred Burnt the Cakes. pp. 104-110ASC 896, ASC 897. English translation at Project Gutenberg

==The battle in fiction==

The battle features in several historical novels and dramas:

==See also==

==Notes==

==References==

publisher=Tony Jebson|accessdate=4 March 2012}}
|location=Cambridge|year=1922}}

==External links==


