[[Royal Radar Establishment]]

CATEGORIES: 20th-century military history of the United Kingdom, Research institutes in Worcestershire, Radar, Malvern, Worcestershire, History of Worcestershire, Military history of Worcestershire, Military research facilities of the United Kingdom, 1953 establishments in the United Kingdom

The name Royal Radar Establishment was given to the existing Radar Research Establishment following a visit by Queen Elizabeth II in 1957. Both names were abbreviated to RRE. The establishment had been formed, under its first name, in 1953 by merging the Telecommunications Research Establishment (TRE) and the Radar Research and Development Establishment (RRDE). These had worked on airborne and ground based radar, respectively.Robert Bud and Philip Gummett, Cold war, hot science: applied research in Britain's defence laboratories, NMSI Trading Ltd. Science Museum, London, 2002.R.A. Smith, Physics at the Radar Research Establishment, Malvern, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathematical and Physical Sciences Vol. 235, No. 1200 (Apr. 10, 1956), pp. 1-10. RRE was located in Malvern, Worcestershire, where both TRE and RRDE had been housed at different sites. The earlier research and development work of TRE and RRDE on radar, solid state physics, electronics, and computer hardware and software was continued in the merged establishment, and the overall scope was extended to include cryogenics and other topics. Infrared detection for guided missiles and heat sensing devices was a major defence application.

==Administrative history==

The earlier radar research organization B.R.S. (Bawdsey Research Station) was on the east coast of England, about 10 miles north east of Felixstowe. It moved to Dundee in Scotland, at the outbreak of World War II, and changed its name to Air Ministry Research Establishment (A.M.R.E.). In May 1940, the organization moved to Worth Matravers, near Swanage in Dorset, on the south coast of England. The organization was renamed again, as Air Ministry Telecommunications Research Establishment. In May 1942, TRE moved to Malvern. The Radar Research and Development Establishment (RRDE) had split off earlier, and was moved to Malvern at about the same time. TRE and the history of radar are discussed in separate articles.
TRE was part of the Ministry of Supply and, when it was formed, so was RRE. In 1959, control passed to the Ministry of Aviation. When this was abolished in 1967, control passed to the Ministry of Technology, then to the Ministry of Aviation Supply, in 1970, and to the Ministry of Defence in 1971. In 1976 RRE merged with the Signals Research and Development Establishment to form the Royal Signals and Radar Establishment (RSRE), which became part of the Defence Research Agency (DRA) in 1991. Later (1995), DRA was absorbed into DERA, the Defence Evaluation and Research Agency. DERA split on 2 June 2001 into two parts, a government body called Dstl (Defence Science and Technology Laboratory) and a company destined for privatisation, which became QinetiQ.
The technical departments of RRE were grouped, initially, into six Divisions: airborne radar, ground radar, guided weapons, basic techniques, physics, and engineering. The organization and personnel are described further, in a collection of linked web sites.The Penley Archives
W. J. Richards, CBE, was Director of TRE at the time of the merger and continued as Director of RRE. W.H. Penley, Head of Guided Missiles, took over for a year in 1961. Then George Macfarlane (after postings outside RRE) became Director in 1962.

==The Physics Division -- some of the staff and their work==

At the time of the name change to Radar Research Establishment in 1953, the senior staff included
Other members of the Physics Division who made significant contributions to several fields of endeavour include:
In 1956, R.A. Smith presented a comprehensive account of the contributions of RRE to physics to the Royal Society.

==Radar, Guided weapons and Engineering Divisions==

Although less conspicuous among academic scientists, these divisions were major players in the defence community, both in policy decision making and as an interface with industry. Development and production contracts brought staff of several companies on site, and extramural contracts strengthened ties with industry still further. "in radar alone: Plessey and Decca for aerials and waveguides, Plessey, Hilger & Watts,Amalgamation of Instrument Makers : Hilger and Watts, Ltd, Nature, 161, 345, 1948. Clarke Chapman and Curran for millimetre-wave radar, and Mullard for precision bombing and radar reconnaissance". On returning to RRE as Director in 1962, George Macfarlane reorganized the technical departments into: Military and Civil Systems (comprising Ground Radar and Air Traffic Control, Guided Weapons and Airborne Radar groups), Physics and Electronics (comprising Physics and Electronic Groups) and Engineering. "Despite the policy shift away from fighters ... to guided weapons for UK air defence, ... RRE continued to argue for strike aircraft and kept up the necessary radar research programs."
Senior staff, of the divisions at various times included
More than 50 books were written by members of the establishment under its successive names. Details are included in the list of references below, and in the TRE article. Many more were in series that members of the staff edited.
In 1968, the Minister of Supply assured a member of parliament that the results of research at RRE on infra-red detectors would be made available to British industry.Written answer to question concerning research at RRE, http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/written_answers/1968/mar/04/royal-radar-establishment-malvern.

==External links==

==References==


