[[Confederate States Constitution]]

CATEGORIES: 1861 in law, Government of the Confederate States of America, Secession crisis of 1860–1861, Constitutions of former countries

The Constitution of the Confederate States of America was the supreme law of the Confederate States of America, as adopted on March 11, 1861,  and in effect through the conclusion of the American Civil War.Constitution of the Confederate States of America - Wikisource, the free online library. Retrieved July 10, 2013. The Confederacy also operated under a Provisional Constitution from February 8, 1861 to March 11, 1861.Constitution of the Provisional Government of the Confederate States of America - Wikisource, the free online library. Retrieved July 10, 2013. The original Provisional Constitution is currently located at the Museum of the Confederacy in Richmond, Virginia,American Civil War :: Hargrett Rare Book & Manuscript Library :: University of Georgia Libraries. Retrieved July 10, 2013. and differs slightly from the version later adopted. The final, hand-written document is currently located in the University of Georgia archives at Athens, Georgia.
In regard to most articles of the Constitution, the document is a word-for-word duplicate of the United States Constitution. However, there are crucial differences between the two documents, in tone and legal content.The United States Constitution - The U.S. Constitution Online - USConstitution.net. Retrieved July 10, 2013.Constitution of the Confederate States of America- what was changed?. Retrieved July 10, 2013.

==Changes from U.S. Constitution==

The Confederate Constitution followed the U.S. Constitution for the most part in the main body of the text with some changes.
Article I differences:
 
  
 
 
 
Article I Section 8(3) adds quite a bit to the U.S. Constitution in an attempt to block the Confederate Congress from passing law to "facilitate commerce" with some exceptions allowing for safety and improvement to waterways.
 
 
 
 
In addition to these there are three altogether new clauses in the Confederate Constitution for Article I Section 9.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Then in Section 10:
 
 
Changes to Article II:
Changes to Article III
Changes to Article IV
 
 Other states may be admitted into this Confederacy by a vote of two-thirds of the whole House of Representatives, and two-thirds of the Senate, the Senate voting by states; but no new state shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other state; nor any state be formed by the junction of two or more states, or parts of states, without the consent of the legislatures of the states concerned as well as of the Congress.Constitution of the Confederate States of America - Wikisource, the free online library. Retrieved July 10, 2013.

Changes to Article V
Changes to Article VI
 
 Article VI Section 1(1)
Changes to Article VII
 When five states shall have ratified this Constitution, in the manner before specified, the Congress under the Provisional Constitution, shall prescribe the time for holding the election of President and Vice President; and, for the meeting of the Electoral College; and, for counting the votes, and inaugurating the President. They shall, also, prescribe the time for holding the first election of members of Congress under this Constitution, and the time for assembling the same. Until the assembling of such Congress, the Congress under the Provisional Constitution shall continue to exercise the legislative powers granted them; not extending beyond the time limited by the Constitution of the Provisional Government.Constitution of the Confederate States of America - Wikisource, the free online library. Retrieved July 10, 2013.
 

==Slavery==

There are several major differences in the two constitutions in the area concerning slavery.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

==States' rights==

Some todayStates' Rights legal definition of States' Rights. States' Rights synonyms by the Free Online Law Dictionary. Retrieved July 10, 2013.Background of the Confederate States Constitution. Retrieved July 10, 2013. feel that the Confederate Constitution's Preamble including the phrase "each State acting in its sovereign and independent character" focuses the new Constitution on the rights of the individual States.
The Confederate States gain several rights that the U.S. States did not have.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Confederate States lose a few rights that the U.S. States retained.
 
 

==Interpretation by Confederate State Courts==

Although the Confederate State Supreme Court was never constituted, the supreme courts of the Confederate States issued numerous decisions interpreting the Confederate Constitution.  Unsurprisingly, given that the Confederate Constitution was based on the United States Constitution, the Confederate State Supreme Courts often used United States Supreme Court precedents.  The jurisprudence of the Marshall Court, thus, influenced the interpretation of the Confederate Constitution.  The state courts repeatedly upheld robust powers of the Confederate Congress, especially on matters of military necessity.Alfred L. Brophy, "Necessity Knows No Law:" Vested Rights and the Styles of Reasoning in the Confederate Conscription Cases, Mississippi Law Journal (2000) 69: 1123-80.

==Signatories==

The signatories of the constitution were:

==References==

==External links==


