[[Taglish]]

CATEGORIES: English language, Tagalog dialects, Tagalog language, Code-switching

Taglish  is a portmanteau of the words "Tagalog" and "English" which refers to the Philippine language Tagalog (or its liberalized official form, Filipino) infused with American English terms. It is an example of code-switching.
Taglish is perhaps most common in Metro Manila, where its use has become stereotyped.  Its influence has nevertheless become great, as it is now arguably a lingua franca in the Tagalog-speaking regions. Another related example of code-switching is  Englog, English infused with Tagalog words, a popular type being called Coño/Konyo English.
As with other examples of code-switching, Taglish is spoken for convenience. Because Tagalog/Filipino words are often longer or (currently) less familiar than their English counterparts, the English words are used instead. For example:
can be said in the classical Tagalog way as:
Instead speakers nowadays say
Another example concerns "homework" and "assignment":
As with "assignment", English words in Taglish are sometimes written in Tagalog phonetic spelling.
Any English verb, and even some nouns, can be converted into a Tagalog verb by following the normal verb tense constructions of Tagalog. This is done usually by the addition of one or more prefixes or infixes and by the doubling of the starting sound of the base form of the verb or noun. The English verb "drive" can be transformed into the Tagalog "magda-drive" meaning "will drive" (used in place of  the Tagalog equivalent "magmamaneho"). The English noun "Internet" can be converted into the Tagalog "nag-Internet", "have used the Internet".
Taglish also applies to speech wherein adjacent clauses are either English or Tagalog. The conjunctions used to connect the clauses can come from either language.
Some examples include:
Taglish may be used in SMS messages to write more quickly.
Taglish is used by Filipinos living abroad (either native speakers of Tagalog or non-native speakers who studied Tagalog in the Philippines or elsewhere), such as in countries where English is a lingua franca like Australia, Canada, the Republic of Ireland, New Zealand, the United States and the United Kingdom.

==See also==

==External links==


