[[Kerim Tekin]]

CATEGORIES: Turkish male singers, Turkish pop singers, People from Erzincan, Road accident deaths in Turkey, 1975 births, 1998 deaths, Year of death missing

Kerim Tekin (April 18, 1975 - June 27, 1998) was a Turkish pop singer and musician.

==Life & career==

He was interested in music from a very early age. While in middle-school, he took vocal and guitar lessons. He started his music career, while still in high school, playing in night clubs.
In 1994, he signed with S Müzik and started working on his first album with a professional band. The album was titled "Kara Gözlüm" (Dark-Eyed One) in 1995; which was produced by Halis Bütünley and included 10 tracks. His song "Cici Baba" was a big hit. This popularity led to him working with some big names in the industry which included Kenan Doğulu, Garo Mafyan, and Zeynep Talu. His hits were especially popular with teenagers.
In 1997, he released his second and last album titled "Haykırsam Dünyaya" (Shout it Out to the World). The new album came with a new image; sexier and more grown up with long locks and some facial hair. The 11th song on the album was again produced by Halis Bütünley. Meanwhile speculations grew over his relationship with fellow singer Zerrin Özer and later it was revealed that his song "Karbeyaz" (White as Snow) was about her. The music video for "Karbeyaz" was a huge success. At what would be the height of his fame, he starred in a show called "Yaz Askim" (My Summer of Love) and started co-producing his movie "Karbeyaz" which is only 20 minutes short of being completed.

==Death==

On June 27, 1998, Tekin died in a chain collision near Afyon, Turkey. It happened immediately after his performance in a festival, where his last song was "Karbeyaz", a song about a lover who would rather die than be without his true love.
Eight years after his death, the producer of the movie "Karbeyaz" and also a good friend of Kerim, Ahmet Altınbaşak, attempted to complete and release the movie. Altınbaşak asked Zerrin Özer to star in five minutes of the remaining 20 minutes. Zerrin said yes, but wanted $40K. Ahmet later released a statement saying that she was unfaithful and was only seeking fame. A model and a fan of Kerim Tekin stepped up, contacted Ahmet, and starred in the five minutes for free. It would appear that the movie remains unreleased (as of 2013). A film with the same title was released in 2010, but bears no relationship to the song by Tekin.

==Albums==

Tracks
Assisted in the studio by Şehrazat, Fedon, Yusuf Bütünley, Ozan Doğulu, Zeynep Türkeş, Volga Tamöz, Feyyaz Kuruş, Kenan Doğulu, İskender Paydaş, and Hakan Demir. 
Tracks

==External links==


