[[A Special Sesame Street Christmas]]

CATEGORIES: 1970s American television specials, 1978 in American television, 1978 television specials, CBS television specials, Christmas television specials, Sesame Street features, Television programmes based on A Christmas Carol

A Special Sesame Street Christmas is a 1978 CBS Christmas special, made the same year as the legendary and still popular Christmas Eve on Sesame Street. The special was first broadcast on Friday, December 8, 1978 at 8 PM ET on CBS, pre-empting Wonder Woman that week.TV Guide listings at Radio-Info: "Retro: Carolina/Tennessee Friday, December 8, 1978", posted December 8, 2009.
The special features only three of the Sesame Street Muppets: Oscar, Big Bird, and Barkley. Barkley is played by gymnast Toby Towson. The Barkley used for the special was a different puppet than the one used for the series, making him five feet tall, or higher, at times in the special. Mr. Hooper, David, Bob, and Maria are the only humans from the regular cast to make appearances. Instead, the regulars are replaced by a large, somewhat all-star cast.
The special features many plot elements that are very loosely tied together, the most important being Oscar as the "Scrooge" on Sesame Street, as a minor takeoff on A Christmas Carol. They include Leslie Uggams thinking lemonade was hot cocoa, singer Anne Murray and a magic eggnog container, Oscar adopting a kitten with a broken leg who was never seen again on the television series (which is out of character for Oscar, even on Christmas), and Ethel Merman calling Imogene Coca an idiot. Also appearing is Dick Smothers (only one half of The Smothers Brothers was hired for the special), Henry Fonda and Michael Jackson.
The special was mainly produced for CBS not by the Children's Television Workshop (now Sesame Workshop), but by Bob Banner Associates, notable for Perry Como's Christmas specials. The producers paid CTW for the use of the set, some of the adult characters, Big Bird and Oscar, with everything else, including the script and the Barkley costume, provided by Banner staffers. 
This program was nominated in the 31st Annual Emmy Awards (1979) under the category of Outstanding Children's Program, ironically losing to Christmas Eve on Sesame Street. Both 
specials are now available on DVD.

==References==

==External links==


