[[Nick Tate]]

CATEGORIES: 1942 births, Australian male film actors, Australian male television actors, Australian male voice actors, Australian people of Russian descent, Australian people of British descent, Best Actor AACTA Award winners, Living people, People from Sydney

Nicholas John "Nick" Tate (born 18 June 1942) is an Australian actor best known for his role as Eagle pilot "Alan Carter" in both seasons of the 1970s science fiction television series Space: 1999, as well as for playing the role of Gordon Hamilton's errant brother James in the 1980s soap opera Sons and Daughters.

==Life and career==

Tate was born in Sydney. His parents were the actors John Tate and Neva Carr Glyn. His maternal grandparents were also actors, originally from Great Britain, who performed in Vaudeville. His father, of Russian descent, also had a connection to the works of Space:1999 creator Gerry Anderson, being a secondary voice actor in Thunderbirds.Nick Tate
Tate's big break came with the Australian television series My Brother Jack, followed by a production of the musical The Canterbury Tales where he played "Nicholas the Gallant" for eighteen months on stage and on tour throughout the country. This was followed by the television series Dynasty (not related to the later American series of the same name), where he joined his father John Tate for the first time on camera; the two playing father and son roles.
Following his work in Space: 1999, he broke through in film with an award-winning role in the movie The Devil's Playground (1976). He continued to work in film with supporting roles in a number of important theatrical films, including  The Year My Voice Broke, Richard Attenborough's Cry Freedom, Return from the River Kwai, A Cry in the Dark, and Hook.  Nick Tate has also made guest appearances on numerous hit TV series, such as The X-Files, Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman, Star Trek: The Next Generation (Episode 83 entitled Final Mission), Murder, She Wrote, Star Trek: Deep Space Nine (in the sixth season episode "Honor Among Thieves"), Farscape and in the Lost episode "Tabula Rasa".
Tate appeared in the TRIP (Tony Rudlin Ingrid Pitt Productions) stage production of Duty Free (later known as Don't Bother To Dress), by Emmerdale writer, Neville Siggs, which ran from 1976 to 1977 at the Bristol Hippodrome.http://theatricalia.com/play/4zv/duty-free/production/axt
He is also known for his voiceover work in theatrical trailers for such films as Jurassic Park and Mission: Impossible, as well as work in commercials, including Guinness beer spots airing beginning in fall 2006. Tate and four other well known voice artists (Don LaFontaine, John Leader, Mark Elliot, and Al Chalk) parodied their individual voiceover styles en route to an awards show in a 1997 short film, 5 Men and a Limo.
In 2000, he provided the voice for the Australian tycoon "Ozzie Mandrill" in the game Escape from Monkey Island.
Nick Tate returned to the musical stage, where he played the leading role of Captain Edward J. Smith in the Australian premiere of the musical Titanic, which opened on 25 October 2006. Nick Tate resides in both Australia and Los Angeles.
He will be in the 2014 film Lupin III.

==References==

==External links==


