[[Astronomical seeing]]

CATEGORIES: Astronomical imaging, Observational astronomy, Observing the Moon, Speckle imaging

Astronomical seeing refers to the blurring and twinkling of astronomical objects such as stars caused by turbulent mixing in the Earth's atmosphere varying the optical refractive index. The astronomical seeing conditions on a given night at a given location describe how much the Earth's atmosphere perturbs the images of stars as seen through a telescope.
The most common seeing measurement is the diameter (technically full width at half maximum or FWHM) of the seeing disc (the point spread function for imaging through the atmosphere). The point spread function diameter (seeing disc diameter or "seeing") is a reference to the best possible angular resolution which can be achieved by an optical telescope in a long photographic exposure, and corresponds to the diameter of the fuzzy blob seen when observing a point-like star through the atmosphere. The size of the seeing disc is determined by the astronomical seeing conditions at the time of the observation. The best conditions give a seeing disk diameter of ~0.4 arcseconds and are found at high-altitude observatories on small islands such as Mauna Kea or La Palma.
Seeing is one of the biggest problems for Earth-based astronomy: while the big telescopes have theoretically milli-arcsecond resolution, the real image will never be better than the average seeing disc during the observation. This can easily mean a factor of 100 between the potential and practical resolution. Starting in the 1990s, new adaptive optics have been introduced that can help correct for these effects, dramatically improving the resolution of ground based telescopes.
The image fluctuations seen when looking at the bottom of a lake on a windy day are caused by refractive index fluctuations, but in the case of a lake they do not result from turbulent mixing.

==The effects of astronomical seeing==

 Image:Zeta_bootis_short_exposure.png|Typical short-exposure negative image of a binary star (Zeta Boötis in this case) as seen through atmospheric seeing. Each star should appear as a single Airy pattern, but the atmosphere causes the images of the two stars to break up into two patterns of speckles (one pattern above left, the other below right). The speckles are a little difficult to make out in this image due to the coarse pixel size on the camera used (see the simulated images below for a clearer example). The speckles move around rapidly, so that each star appears as a single fuzzy blob in long exposure images (called a seeing disc). The telescope used had a diameter of about 7r0 (see definition of r0 below, and example simulated image through a 7r0 telescope). 
Astronomical seeing has several effects:
The effects of atmospheric seeing were indirectly responsible for the belief that there were canals on Mars.[tpl]citation needed|date=January 2011[/tpl]  In viewing a bright object such as Mars, occasionally a still patch of air will come in front of the planet, resulting in a brief moment of clarity.  Before the use of charge-coupled devices, there was no way of recording the image of the planet in the brief moment other than having the observer remember the image and draw it later.  This had the effect of having the image of the planet be dependent on the observer's memory and preconceptions which led the belief that Mars had linear features.
The effects of atmospheric seeing are qualitatively similar throughout the visible and near infra-red wavebands. At large telescopes the long exposure image resolution is generally slightly higher at longer wavelengths, and the timescale (t0 - see below) for the changes in the dancing speckle patterns is substantially lower.

==Measures==

There are three common descriptions of the astronomical seeing conditions at an observatory:

[/ref]) and t0 (the time-scale over which the changes in the turbulence become significant)
These are described in the sub-sections below:

===The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the seeing disc===

Without an atmosphere, a small star would have an apparent size, an "Airy disk", in a telescope image determined by diffraction and would be inversely proportional to the diameter of the telescope.  However when light enters the Earth's atmosphere, the different temperature layers and different wind speeds distort the light waves, leading to distortions in the image of a star. The effects of the atmosphere can be modeled as rotating cells of air moving turbulently. At most observatories, the turbulence is only significant on scales larger than r0 (see below—the seeing parameter r0 is 10–20 cm at visible wavelengths under the best conditions) and this limits the resolution of telescopes to be about the same as given by a space-based 10–20 cm telescope.
The distortion changes at a high rate, typically more frequently than 100 times a second. In a typical astronomical image of a star with an exposure time of seconds or even minutes, the different distortions average out as a filled disc called the point spread function or "seeing disc". The diameter of the seeing disk, most often defined as the full width at half maximum (FWHM), is a measure of the astronomical seeing conditions.
It follows from this definition that seeing is always a variable quantity, different from place to place, from night to night, and even variable on a scale of minutes. Astronomers often talk about "good" nights with a low average seeing disc diameter, and "bad" nights where the seeing diameter was so high that all observations were worthless.
 Image:Eps_aql_movie_not_2000.gif|Slow motion movie of what you see through a telescope when you look at a star at high magnification (negative images). The telescope used had a diameter of about 7r0 (see definition of r0 below, and example simulated image through a 7r0 telescope). Notice how the star breaks up into multiple blobs (speckles) -- entirely an atmospheric effect. Some telescope vibration is also noticeable. 
The FWHM of the seeing disc (or just seeing) is usually measured in arcseconds, abbreviated with the symbol (″). A 1.0″ seeing is a good one for average astronomical sites. The seeing of an urban environment is usually much worse. Good seeing nights tend to be clear, cold nights without wind gusts. Warm air rises (convection), degrading the seeing, as do wind and clouds. At the best high-altitude mountaintop observatories, the wind brings in stable air which has not previously been in contact with the ground, sometimes providing seeing as good as 0.4".

===r0 and t0===

The astronomical seeing conditions at an observatory can be well described by the parameters r0 and t0. For telescopes with diameters smaller than r0, the resolution of long-exposure images is determined primarily by diffraction and the size of the Airy pattern and thus is inversely proportional to the telescope diameter. For telescopes with diameters larger than r0, the image resolution is determined primarily by the atmosphere and is independent of telescope diameter, remaining constant at the value given by a telescope of diameter equal to r0. r0 also corresponds to the length-scale over which the turbulence becomes significant (10–20 cm at visible wavelengths at good observatories), and t0 corresponds to the time-scale over which the changes in the turbulence become significant. r0 determines the spacing of the actuators needed in an active optics system, and t0 determines the correction speed required to compensate for the effects of the atmosphere.
r0 and t0 vary with the wavelength used for the astronomical imaging, allowing slightly higher resolution imaging at longer wavelengths using large telescopes.
r0 is often known as the Fried parameter (pronounced "freed"), named after David L. Fried.

====Mathematical description of r0 and t0====

In reality, the pattern of blobs (speckles) in the images changes very rapidly, so that long-exposure photographs would just show a single large blurred blob in the centre for each telescope diameter. The diameter (FWHM) of the large blurred blob in long-exposure images is called the seeing disc diameter, and is independent of the telescope diameter used (as long as adaptive optics correction is not applied).
\left(\mathbf{r}\right) in the following way:

====The Kolmogorov model of turbulence====

A description of the nature of the wavefront perturbations introduced by the atmosphere is provided by the Kolmogorov model developed by Tatarski, based partly on the studies of turbulence by the
Russian mathematician Andreï Kolmogorov. This model is supported by a variety of experimental measurements and is widely used in simulations of astronomical imaging. The model assumes that the
For simplicity, the phase fluctuations in Tatarski's model are often assumed to have a Gaussian random distribution with the following second-order structure function:
If turbulent evolution is assumed to occur on slow timescales, then the timescale t0 is simply proportional to r0 divided by the mean wind speed.
The refractive index fluctuations caused by Gaussian random turbulence can be simulated using the following algorithm:The effect of temporal fluctuations in r0 on high-resolution observations, Robert N. Tubbs  Proc SPIE 6272 pp 93T, 2006

====Turbulent intermittency====

The assumption that the phase fluctuations in Tatarski's model have a Gaussian random distribution is usually unrealistic. In reality, turbulence exhibits intermittency[ref]
The nature of turbulent motion at large wave-numbers.
Pages 238–255 of: Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A, 199.
[/ref]
These fluctuations in the turbulence strength can be straightforwardly simulated as follows:The effect of temporal fluctuations in r0 on high-resolution observations, Robert N. Tubbs  Proc SPIE 6272 pp 93T, 2006

===The C_n^2 profile===

==Overcoming atmospheric seeing==

The first answer to this problem was speckle imaging, which allowed bright objects to be observed with very high resolution. Later came NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, working outside the atmosphere and thus not having any seeing problems and allowing observations of faint targets for the first time (although with poorer resolution than speckle observations of bright sources from ground-based telescopes because of Hubble's smaller telescope diameter). The highest resolution visible and infrared images currently come from imaging optical interferometers such as the Navy Prototype Optical Interferometer or Cambridge Optical Aperture Synthesis Telescope.
Starting in the 1990s, many telescopes have begun to develop adaptive optics systems that partially solve the seeing problem, but none of the systems so far built or designed completely removes the atmosphere effect, and observations are usually limited to a small region of the sky surrounding relatively bright stars.
Another cheaper technique, lucky imaging, has had very good results. This idea dates back to pre-war naked-eye observations of moments of good seeing, which were followed by observations of the planets on cine film after World War II. The technique relies on the fact that every so often the effects of the atmosphere will be negligible, and hence by recording large numbers of images in real-time, a 'lucky' excellent image can be picked out. This technique can outperform adaptive optics in many cases and is even accessible to amateurs. It does, however, require very much longer observation times than adaptive optics for imaging faint targets, and is limited in its maximum resolution.

==See also==

==References==

Much of the above text is taken (with permission) from Lucky Exposures: Diffraction limited astronomical imaging through the atmosphere, by Robert Nigel Tubbs

==External links==


