[[No te Duermas]]

CATEGORIES: Puerto Rican television series

No te Duermas (translated as Don't Fall Asleep) is a Spanish-language television program, a late-night talk and variety show from Puerto Rico. It started airing in 1990 as a late night show with comedian Antonio Sanchez El Gangster in WSTE-TV SuperSiete. Later on, the show moved to Telemundo Puerto Rico, enjoying great success.

==History==

The idea of the show came from two sources. Originally, producer Gabriel Suau approached Antonio Sánchez with the idea of a talk show called No te Duermas. Suau wanted to have Axel Anderson as host while Sánchez would intervene with comedy sketches, characters and interrupting the interviews. Sánchez, instead, presented Suau an idea he had for a show. Suau then decided to drop his original idea and gave Sánchez the opportunity to lead it.
On February 1990, the show debuted in Channel 7 (Super Siete) instantly peaking at #1 in local popularity charts. After a year, Telemundo made Suau an offer and the show moved on October 1991. The show continued to be #1 for two years, and stayed on the Top 10 for the following years.
In 2005, while negotiating their contract, Telemundo offered Sánchez the chance to do the program from Monday to Friday, and compete directly with Univision's Anda Pa'l Cara. Sánchez accepted, changing also the overall format of the show. In February 2008, the show changed to a Monday through Thursday format, with Esto Esta Kñon, a political discussion and satire show, aired on Friday. This show is produced by Antonio Sánchez himself.
Near the end of 2008, Sánchez announced he would retire the show after almost 19 years. During December 2008, the show featured interviews with people that contributed to the show's success during its history, and shows of old comedy sketches. The last show was aired on December 30, 2008.

==Hosts and models==

Sanchez has been the host of the show for its duration. However, he has been accompanied during most of the show history a female co-host. Some of them have been:
The show has also put models in the spotlight by being on a prime time show. Some of the most famous have been Taína, Glerysbeth, Maripily, La Burbu, Mara Cruz, and others.

==Show format==

The show features interviews to artists, music performances, curious facts, and comedy sketches featuring mostly characters by Sanchez himself. The show was criticized in its beginnings for its raunchy style and general portrait of women. This, however, has helped the show to maintain a strong male following.

==Comedy Characters==

Here is a list of some of the comedy characters portrayed by Antonio Sanchez in his show:

==External links==


