[[The Sand Reckoner]]

CATEGORIES: Ancient Greek astronomy, Mathematics manuscripts, Works by Archimedes, Astronomy books

The Sand Reckoner ([tpl]lang-el|Αρχιμήδης Ψαμμίτης, Archimedes Psammites[/tpl]) is a work by Archimedes in which he set out to determine an upper bound for the number of grains of sand that fit into the universe. In order to do this, he had to estimate the size of the universe according to the contemporary model, and invent a way to talk about extremely large numbers. The work, also known in Latin as Archimedis Syracusani Arenarius & Dimensio Circuli, which is about 8 pages long in translation, is addressed to the Syracusan king Gelo II (son of Hiero II), and is probably the most accessible work of Archimedes; in some sense, it is the first research-expository paper.Archimedes, The Sand Reckoner, by Ilan Vardi, accessed 28-II-2007.

==Naming large numbers==

Another way of describing this number is a one followed by (short scale) eighty quadrillion (80·1015) zeroes.
Archimedes' system is reminiscent of a positional numeral system with base 108, which is remarkable because the ancient Greeks used a very simple system for writing numbers, which employs 27 different letters of the alphabet for the units 1 through 9, the tens 10 through 90 and the hundreds 100 through 900.

==Estimation of the size of the universe==

Archimedes then estimated an upper bound for the number of grains of sand required to fill the Universe. To do this, he used the heliocentric model of Aristarchus of Samos. The original work by Aristarchus has been lost. This work by Archimedes however is one of the few surviving references to his theory,Aristarchus biography at MacTutor, accessed 26-II-2007. whereby the Sun remains unmoved while the Earth revolves about the Sun. In Archimedes' own words:
The reason for the large size of this model is that the Greeks were unable to observe stellar parallax with available techniques, which implies that any parallax is extremely subtle and so the stars must be placed at great distances from the Earth (assuming heliocentrism to be true). 
According to Archimedes, Aristarchus did not state how far the stars were from the Earth. Archimedes therefore had to make an assumption; he assumed that the Universe was spherical and that the ratio of the diameter of the Universe to the diameter of the orbit of the Earth around the Sun equalled the ratio of the diameter of the orbit of the Earth around the Sun to the diameter of the Earth. This assumption can also be expressed by saying that the stellar parallax caused by the motion of the Earth around its orbit equals the solar parallax caused by motion around the Earth.
In order to obtain an upper bound, Archimedes used overestimates of his data by assuming:
Archimedes then computed that the diameter of the Universe was no more than 1014 stadia (in modern units,  about 2 light years), and that it would require no more than 1063 grains of sand to fill it.
Archimedes made some interesting experiments and computations along the way. One experiment was to estimate the angular size of the Sun, as seen from the Earth. Archimedes' method is especially interesting as it takes into account the finite size of the eye's pupil,Smith, William — A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology (1880)  - p.272 and therefore may be the first known example of experimentation in psychophysics, the branch of psychology dealing with the mechanics of human perception, whose development is generally attributed to Hermann von Helmholtz. Another interesting computation accounts for solar parallax and the different distances between the viewer and the Sun, whether viewed from the center of the Earth or from the surface of the Earth at sunrise. This may be the first known computation dealing with solar parallax.

===Equality between Archimedes' number and Eddington's number===

The total number of nucleons in the observable universe of roughly the Hubble radius is the Eddington number, currently estimated at 1080. Archimedes' 1063 grains of sand contain 1080 nucleons, which means that Archimedes' number equals Eddington's number.Harrison, Edward Robert ♦ Cosmology: The Science of the Universe Cambridge University Press, 2000, pp. 481, 482

==Quote==

==References==

==Further reading==

The Sand-Reckoner, by Gillian Bradshaw. Forge (2000), 348pp, ISBN 0-312-87581-9.

==External links==


