[[Pueblo]]

CATEGORIES: Pueblos, Traditional Native American dwellings

Pueblos are modern and old communities of Native Americans in the Southwestern United States of America. The first Spanish explorers of the Southwest used this term to describe the communities housed in apartment-like structures built of stone, adobe mud, and other local material. These structures were usually multi-storied buildings surrounding an open plaza.  They were occupied by hundreds to thousands of Pueblo people, and were only accessible through a ladder able to be lowered only from the inside, thus preventing break-ins and unwanted guests.

==Etymology and usage==

The word pueblo is the Castilian word for "town", which comes from the Latin word populus meaning "people".
Of the federally recognized Native American communities in the Southwest, those designated by the King of Spain as pueblo at the time Spain ceded territory to the United States, after the American Revolutionary War, are legally recognized as Pueblo by the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Some of the pueblos also came under jurisdiction of the United States (in its view) by its treaty with Mexico, which had briefly gained rule over territory in the Southwest ceded by Spain after Mexican independence. There are 21 federally recognized Pueblos"Indian Entities Recognized and Eligible To Receive Services From the United States Bureau of Indian Affairs; Notice" Federal Register 12 July 2002, Part IV, Department of Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs that are home to Pueblo people. Their official federal names are as follows:

==Historical places==

Pre-Columbian towns and villages in the Southwest, such as Acoma, were located in defensible positions, for example, on high steep mesas. Anthropologists and official documents often refer to ancient residents of the area as pueblo cultures. For example, the National Park Service states, "The Late Puebloan cultures built the large, integrated villages found by the Spaniards when they began to move into the area.""The Origins of the Salinas Pueblos", in In the Midst of a Loneliness: The Architectural History of the Salinas Missions, US National Park Service
The people of some pueblos, such as Taos Pueblo, still inhabit centuries-old adobe pueblo buildings.Gibson, Daniel (2001) Pueblos of the Rio Grande: A Visitor's Guide, Rio Nuevo Publishers, Tucson, Arizona, p. 78, ISBN 1-887896-26-0
Contemporary residents often maintain other homes outside the historic pueblos.  Adobe and light construction methods resembling adobe now dominate architecture at the many pueblos of the area, in nearby towns or cities, and in much of the American Southwest.Paradis, Thomas W. (2003) Pueblo Revival Architecture, Northern Arizona University
In addition to contemporary pueblos, numerous ruins of archeological interest are located throughout the Southwest. Some are of relatively recent origin.  Others are of prehistoric origin, such as the cliff dwellings and other habitations of the Ancient Pueblo Peoples or Anasazi, who emerged as a people around the 12th century BCE and began to construct their pueblos about AD 750–900.Hewit "Puebloan History", University of Northern ColoradoGibson, Daniel (2001) "Pueblo History", in Pueblos of the Rio Grande: A Visitor's Guide, Tucson, Arizona: Rio Nuevo Publishers, pp. 3–4, ISBN 1-887896-26-0

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


