[[America's Sweethearts]]

CATEGORIES: 2001 films, 2000s romantic comedy films, American romantic comedy films, American sex comedy films, Films shot anamorphically, Columbia Pictures films, Revolution Studios films, Adultery in films, Films about filmmaking, Films about actors, Screenplays by Billy Crystal, Screenplays by Peter Tolan, Film scores by James Newton Howard

America's Sweethearts is a 2001 romantic comedy film directed by Joe Roth and written by Crystal and Peter Tolan. It stars Julia Roberts, Billy Crystal, John Cusack, and Catherine Zeta-Jones, with Hank Azaria, Stanley Tucci, Seth Green, Alan Arkin, and Christopher Walken in smaller roles.

==Plot==

Lee Phillips (Crystal) is a movie publicist who is tasked with promoting a film featuring movie stars Gwen Harrison (Zeta-Jones) and Eddie Thomas (Cusack). However, his job is complicated by the fact that the eccentric director of the film, Hal Weidmann (Walken), is refusing to show him a cut of the film, demanding that the first viewing take place at a press junket. To promote the film, Lee decides to focus on the two stars: Gwen and Eddie, once known as "America's Sweethearts". The problem is that the two are going through an ugly split. As a result of Gwen's affair with Hector (Azaria), Eddie has suffered an emotional breakdown and holed up at a New Age retreat. Lee decides that his best chance to promote the film is to get the couple back together. 
Lee tries to manipulate Gwen and Eddie into attending the junket. He plays on Gwen's ego, persuading her that she will look better to the press and her fans if she attends, and also noting that it will give her an opportunity to finally serve Eddie with divorce papers. He also bribes the owner of the New Age retreat with an expensive car to get him to convince Eddie to come. The situation is complicated by the involvement of Gwen's sister and personal assistant, Kiki (Roberts) and Gwen's lover Hector. Eddie had always liked Kiki. When he sees her at the junket, he is pleasantly surprised to discover that she has lost a lot of weight and is now physically very attractive.
As the junket begins, Eddie and Gwen are forced to be around each other even though they want nothing  to do with one another. Gwen forces Kiki to take her place whenever possible and serve as the go-between with Eddie. As an unintended consequence, the spark between Eddie and Kiki begins to grow. Gwen is oblivious to their attraction but still refuses to be outshone by anyone, least of all her own sister. 
When the movie is finally shown at the press junket, the press, actors and others involved in the film discover, to their dismay, that Weidmann essentially junked the script and instead delivered a movie composed of footage shot making the movie - much taken without the actors' knowledge. Essentially, Weidmann delivered Hollywood's first "Reality Movie". The footage shows Gwen as self-centered, conniving and manipulative and Eddie as a decent man becoming increasingly paranoid as he begins to suspect that his wife is having an affair, fundamentally presenting Gwen as an antagonist alongside with Hector while Eddie as the protagonist of the story. Eddie is the only cast member who is pleased with Weidmann's direction and expresses interest of working with him again. Because of critical praise from the press, the studio is forced to release the film, which was Weidmann's plan all along. 
It is implied that the movie will revive Eddie's acting career but ruin Gwen's and that she intends to sue the studio. In one scene from Weidmann's film, Gwen complains about the size of Hector's manhood. This leads to a vicious reprimand from Weidmann's daughter Leaf (Pratt), who had a one-night stand with Hector during the shooting of the movie.
Gwen attempts to salvage the situation by announcing she is reuniting with Eddie, but Eddie finally finds the strength to admit his love for Kiki and, for the first time in her life, Kiki finds the courage to stand up to Gwen. This results in Gwen firing Kiki as her assistant. After the junket, Kiki and Eddie pack and prepare to leave the hotel together. When confronted by press, Gwen admits that she and Eddie are no longer together and that she is actually in love with Hector. However, it is evident that their relationship is disintegrating.

==Cast==

==Critical response==

Reviews for America's Sweethearts were generally unfavorable, and the film holds a 31% at Rotten Tomatoes. Critics' consensus was "Despite its famous cast, the movie lacks sympathetic characters and is only funny in spurts."

==Box office performance==

The film opened at #2 in its first opening weekend at the U.S. Box office, behind Jurassic Park 3. America's Sweethearts was a box office success and grossed over $138 million worldwide.America's Sweethearts at BoxOfficeMojo

==References==

==External links==


