[[Carnegie Institute of Technology]]

CATEGORIES: Schools and departments of Carnegie Mellon, Engineering universities and colleges in Pennsylvania, Educational institutions established in 1900, Andrew Carnegie, Pittsburgh History & Landmarks Foundation Historic Landmarks, 1900 establishments in Pennsylvania

The Carnegie Institute of Technology (CIT), is Carnegie Mellon University’s College of Engineering. The College can trace its origins from Andrew Carnegie's founding of the Carnegie Technical Schools and is named for him. Today, CIT has seven departments of study and is consistently ranked one of the top ten engineering programs in the nation and the world.US News Engineer Ranking

==History==

By 1905, the massive buildings of the Carnegie Technical Schools were being constructed in a field east of the University of Pittsburgh. The first students of the School of Science and Technology began classes in unfinished buildings, still surrounded by new construction.  The school initially offered two- and three-year programs to train the children of Pittsburgh's working class. After the merger between Carnegie Tech and the Mellon Institute of Industrial Research, the newly formed Carnegie Mellon University's College of Engineering and Science was divided into the Carnegie Institute of Technology (engineering) and the Mellon College of Science.
CIT has led the way in many engineering fields and trends. In 1971, with the help from the Heinz College, CIT established one of the first departments in Engineering and Public Policy to educate engineers in social and policy issues while performing research in science and technology policy. In 1989, CIT established the nation’s first institute devoted to information networking, the Information Networking Institute.CIT Interactive Timeline

==About the College of Engineering==

There are approximately 1,650 full-time undergraduate, 620 master’s, and 680 doctoral students enrolled at CIT. The college employs 170 faculty members whose research is recognized and supported by such sources as the National Science Foundation, the National Institutes of Health, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, and the Environmental Protection Agency.About CIT: distinguishing characteristics As part of Carnegie Mellon University, the College of Engineering works to carry out the university’s mission of “changing the needs of society by building on its traditions of innovation, problem solving and interdisciplinarity”.CIT vision and Mission Students in the College of Engineering have the advantage of working with experts in their own field of study, as well as with students and faculty across the other engineering departments and academic colleges.  Because of the college’s small size and focus on interdisciplinary collaboration, students graduate with a high-quality education that extends far beyond their expert technical knowledge, ensuring they have the problem-solving skills needed to be successful in a diverse collection of individual careers.CIT educational objectives CIT's Office of the Dean is housed in Scaife Hall and the college's primary facilities include Hamerschlag Hall, Roberts Engineering Hall, and Doherty Hall. The university is in process of building Scott Hall which will house CIT departments and institutes as well.

==Academics==

Carnegie Mellon’s College of Engineering offers undergraduate and graduate degrees in seven academic departments and two institutes.

==Research==

CIT has an international reputation in research and innovation and is affiliated with several research centers.

==References==

==External links==


