[[Susan Egan]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, American female singers, American film actresses, American musical theatre actresses, American stage actresses, American television actresses, American voice actresses, Living people, People from Seal Beach, California

Susan Egan (born February 18, 1970) is an American actress and singer known for her work on the Broadway stage. She is best known for originating the role of Belle in the Broadway musical adaptation of the Disney animated feature Beauty and the Beast as well as for providing the voice of Megara in the Disney animated feature, Hercules.

==Biography==

Egan was born in Seal Beach, California. Always wanting to be a performer, she spent most of her time taking dancing and singing lessons as a child. She remarks she took a lot of ballet as she heard it would help with all forms of performing. She attended Los Alamitos High School and the co-located Orange County High School of the Arts and UCLA. In the meantime, she started her career touring with the performance group The Young Americans. While attending UCLA, she took time off when Tommy Tune cast her as Kim in his touring production of Bye Bye Birdie.Henerson, Evan."Broadway bent", Long Beach Press Telegram , August 2001  After the tour ended, she was cast in the tour of State Fair and won the coveted role of "Belle" in the original Broadway cast of Beauty and the Beast for which she was nominated for the Tony Award and the Drama Desk Award, Outstanding Actress in a Musical."Susan Egan at Internet Broadway Database", ibdb.com, accessed February 19, 2010 She is married to Robert Hartmann and they had two daughters, Nina, born February 6, 2007, and Isla, born December 15, 2009. She currently resides in Orange County, California."Susan Egan gives back at Chance benefit"Orange County Register (reprint), August 24, 2009 She played "Belle" for one year on Broadway and then reprised her role in the Los Angeles production in 1995 along with many of the original Broadway cast members. At the Sacramento Music Circus, she played "Maria" in The Sound of Music in 1996"Susan Egan Biography", filmreference.com, accessed February 19, 2010 and "Molly Brown" in The Unsinkable Molly Brown in 2002. She joined the Broadway musical Thoroughly Modern Millie in February 2004 as "Millie".Jones, Kenneth."Beat the Drums: Susan Egan Is Broadway's New Modern Millie, Starting Feb. 16", playbill.com, February 16, 2004 
Egan's voice has been featured in the English-language versions of two feature films by Japanese animator Hayao Miyazaki, Spirited Away and Porco Rosso, as well as the Disney animated feature, Hercules as Megara, the role she is most widely known for playing. She reprised the role of Megara in the Disney/Square Enix video game Kingdom Hearts II."Susan Egan at Internet Movie Database", imdb.com, accessed February 19, 2010 Egan appeared at the Hollywood Bowl in the concert version of Show Boat in August 2001 as "Julie". She has performed in one-woman cabaret-style concerts at the Carpenter Performing Arts Center in October 2001, and the Orange County Performing Arts Center in 2000.Boehm, Mike."This Belle Is Having a Ball",Los Angeles Times (reprint), February 14, 2000 She sings with symphonies as well;"Press Release" susanegan.net, accessed February 19, 2010 she performed in concert at the Walt Disney Concert Hall with the Gay Men's Chorus of Los Angeles in November 2004.Gans, Andrew."Susan Egan to Sing Jerry Herman at Nov. 8 L.A. Concert", playbill.com, October 11, 2004
Susan Egan was in Lady and the Tramp II: Scamp's Adventure as Angel (singing voice). She was the Interim Artistic Director of the Orange County High School of the Arts in 2002-2003.Gans, Andrew."Diva Talk:Sondheim Comes to NYC, Busy Newman, Your Little Shop Picks" playbill.com, July 19, 2002 On television, she is best known for her co-starring role as Nikki Cox's Eve Arden-ish best friend on the WB sitcom Nikki, which ran for two seasons from 2000-2002.

==Filmography==

Source:

==Broadway and stage==

Source:

==Discography==

''Source:"Susan Egan listing", amazon.com, accessed February 19, 2010

==Other==

Source:

==References==

==External links==


