[[Department for Education and Skills (United Kingdom)]]

CATEGORIES: Higher education in the United Kingdom, History of education in England, Defunct departments of the United Kingdom Government, Education ministries, Ministries established in 2007, 2001 establishments in the United Kingdom

The Department for Education and Skills (DfES) was a United Kingdom government department between 2001 and 2007,  responsible for the education system and children's services in England. On 28 June 2007 Gordon Brown's government split it into the Department for Children, Schools and Families and the Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills. In 2010, when the Conservative/Lib Dem Coalition Government took control, Michael Gove became Secretary of State for Education. His department is the Department for Education.
DfES worked under the Secretary of State for Education and Skills.  Its main remit could be summed up as schools and adult learning, with sections dealing with linked areas such as child welfare.
DfES had four main locations: London (Sanctuary Buildings and Caxton House, both close to Westminster Abbey), Sheffield (Moorfoot),  Darlington (Mowden Hall), and Runcorn (Castle View House), and also regional Government Offices.
Education is a devolved issue and therefore the responsibility of other government departments in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.

==History==

The Department of Education and Science was created in 1964 with the merger of the offices of Minister of Education and the Minister of Science, with Quintin Hogg as minister.
In 1992 the responsibility for science was transferred to the Cabinet Office's Office of Public Service and the Department of Trade and Industry's Office of Science and Technology, and the department was renamed Department for Education.
In 1995, in the reshuffle after the Conservative leadership election of that year, the department merged with the Department of Employment to become the Department for Education and Employment (DfEE).
After the 2001 general election, the employment functions were transferred to the new Department for Work and Pensions, with the DfEE becoming the Department for Education and Skills (DfES).
During new Prime Minister Gordon Brown's Cabinet reshuffle, two new government departments were created to take over the work of the DfES, the Department for Children, Schools and Families and the Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills. The latter also took over some of the work of the former Department of Trade and Industry (now the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills).

==Ministers==

Ministers in the DfES from 5 May 2006 to 28 June 2007:

==Permanent Secretary==

The permanent secretary of a UK Department is the senior civil servant.  While working under the direction of the political ministers (almost exclusively members of the UK's current governing political party), the PS (and other senior civil servants, especially the Finance Director) has many traditional and statutory responsibilities that are aimed at ensuring that government departments are, as far as possible, run in the public interest. 
Permanent Secretaries:

==See also==

==External links==


