[[Boris I of Bulgaria]]

CATEGORIES: 9th-century births, 907 deaths, 9th-century Christian saints, 9th-century Bulgarian monarchs, Bulgarian people of the Byzantine–Bulgarian Wars, Christianity in medieval Macedonia, Eastern Orthodox saints, History of Bulgaria, Orthodox monarchs, Medieval Bulgarian saints

Boris I, also known as Boris-Mikhail (Michael) and Bogoris ([tpl]lang-bg|Борис I / Борис-Михаил[/tpl]; died 2 May 907), was the Knyaz (Prince) of the First Bulgarian Empire in 852–889. At the time of his baptism in 864, Boris was named Michael after his godfather, Emperor Michael III. The historian Steven Runciman called him one of the greatest persons in history.Runciman, p. 152
Despite a number of military setbacks, the reign of Boris I was marked with significant events that shaped Bulgarian and Slavic history. With the Christianization of Bulgaria the traditional state religion Tengriism was abolished. A skilful diplomat, Boris I successfully exploited the conflict between the Patriarchate of Constantinople and the Papacy to secure an autocephalous Bulgarian Church, thus dealing with the nobility's concerns about Byzantine interference in Bulgaria's internal affairs.
When in 885 the disciples of Saints Cyril and Methodius were banished from Great Moravia, Boris I gave them refuge and provided assistance to develop the Slavic alphabet and literature. After he abdicated in 889, his eldest son and successor tried to restore the old pagan religion but was deposed by Boris I. During the Council of Preslav which followed that event, the Byzantine clergy was replaced with Bulgarians, and the Greek language was replaced with Old Church Slavonic as an official language of the Church and the state.
He is regarded as a saint in the Orthodox Church, as the Prince and baptizer of Bulgaria, and as Equal-to-the-Apostles, with his feast day observed on May 2.[tpl]gr icon[/tpl] Ὁ Ἅγιος Βόρις – Μιχαὴλ ὁ Ἱσαπόστολος ὁ πρίγκιπας καὶ Φωτιστῆς τοῦ Βουλγαρικοῦ λαοῦ. 2 Μαΐου. ΜΕΓΑΣ ΣΥΝΑΞΑΡΙΣΤΗΣ.

==Name and titles==

After his official act of conversion to Christianity, Boris adopted the Christian name Michael. He is sometimes called Boris-Michael in historical research.
The only direct evidence of Boris's title are his seals and the inscription found near the town of Ballsh, modern Albania, and at Varna. There he is called by the Byzantine title "Archon of Bulgaria", which is usually translated as "ruler", and in the 10-11th centuries also as "Knyaz".Бакалов, Георги. Средновековният български владетел. (Титулатура и инсигнии), София 1995, с. 144, 146, Бобчев, С. С. Княз или цар Борис? (към историята на старобългарското право). Титлите на българските владетели, Българска сбирка, ХІV, 5, 1907, с. 311 In the Bulgarian sources from that period, Boris I is called "Knyaz", and during the Second Bulgarian Empire, "Tsar".Бакалов, Георги. Средновековният български владетел..., с. 144-146
In modern historiography Boris is called by different titles. Most historians accept that he changed his title after his conversion to Christianity. According to them, before the baptism he had the title HanЗлатарски, Васил 1927 (1994). „История на Българската държава през Средните векове, т.1, ч.2“, Второ фототипно издание, София: Академично издателство „Марин Дринов“, стр. 29. ISBN 954-430-299-9. or Khan,12 мита в българската историяСтраница за прабългарите and after that Knyaz.Златарски, Васил 1927 (1994). „История на Българската държава през Средните векове, т.1, ч.2“, Второ фототипно издание, София: Академично издателство „Марин Дринов“. ISBN 954-430-299-9. According to another theory, the title Knyaz was used by Bulgarian rulers since the reign of Asparukh.Гербов, К. Канасубиги е "княз", а не "хан" или "кан" - Омуртаг и Маламир са били князе преди Борис

==Reign==

===Situation in central Europe in the middle of the 9th century===

The early 9th century marked the beginning of a fierce rivalry between the Greek East and Latin West, which would ultimately lead to the schism between the Eastern Orthodox Church in Constantinople and the Catholic Church in Rome.
As early as 781, the Empress Irene began to seek a closer relationship with the Carolingian dynasty and the Papacy. She negotiated a marriage between her son, Constantine, and Rotrude, a daughter of Charlemagne by his third wife Hildegard. Irene went as far as to send an official to instruct the Frankish princess in Greek; however, Irene herself broke off the engagement in 787, against her son's wishes. When the Second Council of Nicaea of 787 reintroduced the veneration of icons under Empress Irene, the result was not recognized by Charlemagne since no Frankish emissaries had been invited even though Charlemagne was by then ruling more than three provinces of the old Roman empire. While this improved relations with the Papacy, it did not prevent the outbreak of a war with the Franks, who took over Istria and Benevento in 788. 
When Charlemagne was proclaimed Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire by Leo III, the Pope was effectively nullifying the legitimacy of Irene. He certainly desired to increase the influence of the papacy and to honour his protector Charlemagne. Irene, like many of her predecessors since Justinian I, was too weak to protect Rome and its much reduced citizenry and the city was not being ruled by any emperor. Thus, Charlemagne's assumption of the imperial title was not seen as an usurpation in the eyes of the Franks or Italians. It was, however, seen as such in Byzantium, but protests by Irene and her successor Nicephorus I had no great effect.
Mojmír I managed to unite some Slavic princes and established Great Moravia in 833. His successor, Rastislav, also fought against the Germans.К. Грот, Моравия и Мадяры, Петроград, 1881, стр. 108 и сл. Both states tried to maintain good relations with Bulgaria on account of its considerable military power.

===Military campaigns===

Boris I was the son and successor of Presian I of Bulgaria. In 852 he sent emissaries to Eastern Francia to confirm the peace treaty of 845.Rudolfi Fulden. annales, an. 852Pertz, Mon. Germ. SS, I, p. 367: legationes Bulgarorum Sclavorumque et absolvit At the time of his accession he threatened the Byzantines with an invasion, but his armies did not attack,Genesios, ed. Bon., p. 85—86 and he received a small area in Strandzha to the southeast.В. Н. Златарски, Известия за българите, стр. 65—68 The peace treaty was not signed, however, although both states exchanged temporary delegations.В. Розен, Император Василий Болгаробойца, Петроград, 1883, стр. 14 In 854 the Moravian Prince Rastislav persuaded Boris I to help him against East Francia. According to some sources, some Franks bribed the Bulgarian monarch to attack Louis the German.Dümmler, каз. съч., I, стр. 38 The Bulgarian-Slav campaign was a disaster, and Louis scored a great victory and invaded Bulgaria.Migne, Patrol. gr., t. 126, cap. 34, col. 197 In the same time the Croats waged a war against the Bulgarians. Both peoples had coexisted peacefully up to that time, suggesting that the Croats were paid by Louis to attack Bulgaria and distract Boris' attention from his alliance with Great Moravia.К. Грот, Известия о сербах и хорватах, стр. 125—127 Kanasubigi Boris could not achieve any success, and both sides exchanged gifts and settled for peace.Const. Porphyr., De admin, imp., ed. Bon, cap. 31, p. 150—151 As a result of the military actions in 855, the peace between Bulgaria and Eastern Francia was restored, and Rastislav was forced to fight against Louis alone. In the meantime, a conflict between the Byzantines and Bulgarians had started in 855-856, and Boris, distracted by his conflict with Louis, lost Philippopolis (Plovdiv), the region of Zagora, and the ports around the Gulf of Burgas on the Black Sea to the Byzantine army led by Michael III and the caesar Bardas.Gjuzelev, p. 130Bulgarian historical review, v.33:no.1-4, p.9.
In spite of various reverses, Boris succeeded in maintaining the territorial integrity of his realm. [tpl]clarify|date=October 2013[/tpl]

====Serbia====

After the death of Knez Vlastimir of Serbia circa 850, his state was divided between his sons. Vlastimir and Boris' father had fought each other in the Bulgarian-Serbian War of 839-842, which resulted in a Serbian victory, and Boris sought to avenge that defeat. In 853 or 854, the Bulgarian army led by Vladimir-Rasate, the son of Boris I, invaded Serbia, with the aim to replace the Byzantine overlordship on the Serbs. The Serbian army was led by Mutimir and his two brothers and defeated the Bulgarians, capturing Vladimir and 12 boyars.Fine, The Early Medieval Balkans, p. 141 Boris I and Mutimir agreed on peace (and perhaps an alliance), and Mutimir sent his sons Pribislav and Stefan to the border to escort the prisoners, where they exchanged items as a sign of peace. Boris himself gave them "rich gifts", while he was given "two slaves, two falcons, two dogs, and 80 furs".F. Raçki, Documenta historiae Chroatie etc., Zagreb, 1877, p. 359.П. Шафарик, Славян. древн., II, 1, стр. 289.Const. Porphyr., ibid., cap. 32, p. 154-155
An internal conflict among the Serbian brothers resulted in Mutimir banishing the two younger brothers to the Bulgarian court.The Serbs, p. 15 Mutimir, however, kept a nephew, Petar, in his court for political reasons.Đekić, Đ. 2009, "Why did prince Mutimir keep Petar Gojnikovic?", Teme, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 683-688. PDF The reason of the feud is not known, though it is postulated that it was a result of treachery. Petar would later defeat Pribislav, Mutimir's son, and take the Serbian throne.

===Motivations for baptism and conversion to Christianity===

For a variety of diplomatic reasons, Boris became interested in converting to Christianity. In order to both extend his control over the Slavic world and gain an ally against one of the most powerful foes of the Bulgars, the Byzantine Empire, Boris sought to establish an alliance with Louis the German against Ratislav of Moravia. [ref] 
 </ref> Through this alliance, Louis promised to supply Boris with missionaries, which would have effectively brought the Bulgars under the Roman Church. <ref name=“Barford”> 
