[[Brian Stonehouse]]

CATEGORIES: 1918 births, 1998 deaths, 20th-century British painters, British Army officers, British Army personnel of World War II, British draughtsmen, Dachau concentration camp survivors, Mauthausen-Gusen concentration camp survivors, Members of the Order of the British Empire, Natzweiler-Struthof concentration camp survivors, Nazi concentration camp survivors, People from Torquay, Royal Artillery soldiers, Special Operations Executive personnel

Brian Julian Warry Stonehouse MBE (29 August 1918 – 2 December 1998) was a British painter and Special Operations Executive agent during World War II.
He was born in Torquay, England.  When his family moved to France, he went to school in Wimereux, Pas-de-Calais.  Back in Britain in 1932, he studied art in Ipswich at Ipswich Art School

==Second World War years==

Stonehouse worked as an artist but joined the Territorial Army after the outbreak of World War II. He was later conscripted into the Royal Artillery.  In 1940, he worked as an interpreter for French troops in Glasgow who had been evacuated from Norway.  In the autumn of 1941, he was training for a commission in the 121 Officer Cadet Unit when the Special Operations Executive contacted him.  Due to his fluency in French, SOE recruited him as a wireless operator with code name of Celestin.
On 1 July 1941, Brian Stonehouse parachuted into occupied France near the city of Tours in the Loire Valley.  His radio got caught in a tree and he spent five nights in the forest before he could get it down.  After finally retrieving it, the radio would not work properly and his contact told him to move to Lyon. 
In September, accompanied by another agent, Blanche Charlet, he went to a safe house and made contact with the other SOE agents.  By August he was in regular contact with the SOE station in London.  However he became careless and transmitted too much and too long.  As a result, German direction-finders triangulated his position and the Milice arrested him on 24 October 1941 in Chateau Hurlevent near Lyon.  Blanche Charlet was also captured but later managed to escape to London. After the war Stonehouse discovered that Charlet had tried to committ suicide because of the capture of the man she loved whilst her responsibility. 
In Castres prison, the Gestapo placed Stonehouse in solitary confinement while subjecting him to frequent and brutal interrogations.  In December he was transferred to Fresnes prison in Paris and further interrogated.  Eventually he was shipped to Germany with other SOE prisoners.  In October 1943, he arrived in Saarbrücken and in November was sent to Mauthausen concentration camp.  He spent a brief time in a Luftwaffe factory camp in Vienna. 
In the summer of 1944, he was transferred to the Natzweiler-Struthof concentration camp in Alsace with Pat O'Leary (war alias of Albert Guérisse), the Pat Line organizer.  There he saved his life by drawing sketches for the camp commandant, guards and their families.[ref]
