[[Ferdinand von Lindemann]]

CATEGORIES: 1852 births, 1939 deaths, 19th-century German mathematicians, 20th-century mathematicians, German mathematicians, Number theorists, People from Hanover, People from the Kingdom of Hanover, University of Göttingen alumni, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg alumni, Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich alumni, University of Königsberg faculty

Carl Louis Ferdinand von Lindemann (April 12, 1852 – March 6, 1939) was a German mathematician, noted for his proof, published in 1882, that π (pi) is a transcendental number, meaning it is not a root of any polynomial with rational coefficients.

==Life and education==

Lindemann was born in Hanover, the capital of the Kingdom of Hanover.  His father, Ferdinand Lindemann, taught modern languages at a Gymnasium in Hanover.  His mother, Emilie Crusius, was the daughter of the Gymnasium's headmaster.  The family later moved to Schwerin, where young Ferdinand attended school.
He studied mathematics at Göttingen, Erlangen, and Munich.  At Erlangen he received a doctorate, supervised by Felix Klein, on non-Euclidean geometry. Lindemann subsequently taught in Würzburg and at the University of Freiburg. During his time in Freiburg, Lindemann devised his proof that π is a transcendental number (see Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem). After his time in Freiburg, Lindemann transferred to the University of Königsberg. While a professor in Königsberg, Lindemann acted as supervisor for the doctoral theses of the now renowned mathematicians David Hilbert, Hermann Minkowski, and Arnold Sommerfeld.

==Transcendence proof==

In 1882, Lindemann published the result for which he is best known, the transcendence of π.  His methods were similar to those used nine years earlier by Charles Hermite to show that e, the base of natural logarithms, is transcendental.  Before the publication of Lindemann's proof, it was known that if π was transcendental, then it would be impossible to square the circle by compass and straightedge.

==External links==


