[[The Time Tunnel]]

CATEGORIES: 1960s American television series, 1966 American television series debuts, 1967 American television series endings, Fictional depictions of Abraham Lincoln in television, American Broadcasting Company network shows, American science fiction television series, English-language television programming, Lists of American television series episodes, Jiro Kuwata, Television series by Fox Television Studios, Television series by Irwin Allen Television Productions, Time travel devices, Time travel television series

The Time Tunnel is a 1966–1967 U.S. color science fiction TV series, written around a theme of time travel adventure. The show was creator-producer Irwin Allen's third science fiction television series, released by 20th Century Fox and broadcast on ABC. The show ran for one season of 30 episodes. Reruns are viewable on cable and by internet streaming. A pilot for a new series was produced in 2002, although it was not picked up.

==Premise==

Project Tic-Toc is a top secret U.S. government effort to build an experimental time machine, known as "The Time Tunnel" due to its appearance as a cylindrical hallway.  The base for Project Tic-Toc is a huge, hidden underground complex in Arizona, 800 floors deep and employing over 36,000 people.  The directors of the project are Dr. Douglas Phillips (Robert Colbert), Dr. Anthony Newman (James Darren), and Lt. General Heywood Kirk (Whit Bissell). The specialists assisting them are Dr. Raymond Swain (John Zaremba), a foremost expert in electronics, and Dr. Ann MacGregor (Lee Meriwether), an electro-biologist supervising the unit that determines how much force and heat a time traveler is able to withstand. The series is set in 1968, two years into the future of the actual broadcast season, 1966-67.The Time Tunnel: Volume One and The Time Tunnel: Volume Two DVD sets
Project Tic-Toc is in its tenth year when United States Senator Leroy Clark (Gary Merrill) comes to investigate in order to determine whether the project, which has cost 7.5 billion dollars, is worth continuing. Senator Clark feels the project is a waste of government funds. When speaking to Phillips, Kirk, and Newman in front of the Time Tunnel, he delivers an ultimatum: either they send someone into time and return him during the course of his visit or their funding will cease. Tony volunteers for this endeavor, but he is turned down by project director Doug Phillips. Defying this decision, Tony sends himself into time. Doug follows shortly after to rescue him, but they both continue to be lost in time. Senator Clark returns to Washington with the promise that funding will not be cut off to the project, leaving General Kirk in charge.
The stage is set for the progress of the series as Tony and Doug are now "switched" from one period in history to another, allowing episodes to be set in the past and future. Each episode (up to episode 24) begins with the following narration (voiced by Dick Tufeld):
Tony and Doug become participants of notable past events like the Sinking of the Titanic, the Attack on Pearl Harbor, the eruption of Krakatoa, Custer's Last Stand, and the Battle of the Alamo among others. General Kirk, Ray, and Ann in the control room are able to locate them in time and space, observe them, communicate with them through voice contact, and send help. When the series is abruptly cancelled in the summer of 1967, they do not film an episode in which Tony and Doug are safely returned to the Time Tunnel complex.

==Possibility of time travel==

Time travel is facilitated by time being portrayed as a static continuum, accessible at any point through the Time Tunnel as a corridor spanning its infinite reaches. When Senator Clark sees an image of the Titanic on the image screen in the course of episode one, he is told by Dr. Swain that he is seeing "the living past", and Althea Hall is told by Tony Newman that the past and the future are the same. The Time Tunnel is also a portal connecting the Time Tunnel "complex" with the same time periods in which Doug and Tony are located. Other persons in time can also be relocated by the Time Tunnel from their time to another time as Machiavelli is switched from his own time to the time of the Gettysburg Campaign of 1863. Bringing back to the future persons other than Tony and Doug happens continually in the series.
In the course of the series Doug, Tony, and the Time Tunnel personnel discover that events of the past can be altered to some extent by the intrusion of the time travelers, and in a few cases their historical research allows for it. Episode twenty-six ("Attack of the Barbarians") explores the scenario of one of the time travelers falling in love with a person from the past: Tony and the Princess Serit, daughter of Kublai Khan. Marco Polo tells Doug, "Can they not touch each other?" History itself hints at the possibility of Serit marrying Tony as Ann informs General Kirk. The historical information on Billy the Kid's victims alarms Ann, Ray, and the General as it records that he killed two strangers near Lincoln, New Mexico in April, 1881--just when Tony, Doug and Billy the Kid are brought together.

==Production==

The production used sets, stock footage and props left over from the large number of period dramas made by the 20th Century Fox film company. Even black-and-white shots of the Titanic sinking were tinted for use in this color production. Only a few actors were costumed for a given episode, interspersed with cuts of great masses of people similarly dressed from original features.  Only one set was constructed for the show, that of the Time Tunnel main control room.  For the pilot episode, a large control room set was built, and a longer Time Tunnel was created using optical matte shots.  After the pilot episode, location changes occurred for the production of the series; Colbert and Darren shot their scenes in another studio, on the 20th Century Fox backlot, or on location, while those who portrayed the Time Tunnel personnel filmed all their scenes on revised and smaller (due to the production having to utilize a smaller sound stage than used during the pilot filming) Time Tunnel control room set.  Some episodes featured space aliens who wore costumes and carried props originally created for other Irwin Allen television and movie productions. Prop sets were similarly re-used. The prop computer looked realistic because it was an array of memory modules from the Air Force's recently decommissioned SAGE computer.
Continuity errors and errors in historical fact occurred throughout the series. In the premiere episode, "Rendezvous with Yesterday", Captain Smith of the Titanic is called "Malcolm" when his name was Edward historically. The names of the secondary officers are also fictitious, though Walter Lord's best-selling book A Night to Remember had been released only nine years earlier. Tony states that he was born in 1938. A few episodes later in "The Day the Sky Fell in", he states he was seven when Pearl Harbor was bombed in 1941, which would make the year of his birth 1934.
The theme for The Time Tunnel was composed by John Williams (credited as "Johnny Williams"). GNP Crescendo later released an album featuring Williams' work and the score composed by George Duning for the episode "The Death Merchant".
The series won an Emmy Award in 1967, for Individual Achievements in Cinematography. The award went to L.B. "Bill" Abbott, for his photographic special effects.[tpl]cite web|title=Emmy Awards: Individual Achievements In Cinematography 1967|url=http://www.emmys.com/nominations/1967/INDIVIDUAL%20ACHIEVEMENTS%20IN%20CINEMATOGRAPHY|accessdate=20 July 2011[/tpl]

==Recurring themes==

==Episodes==

While the episodes were first shown in 1966, the show's setting begins in 1968, two years into the then-future.The Time Tunnel:  Volume One and The Time Tunnel:  Volume Six DVD sets

===Movies excerpted (partial listing)===

==Media==

===Novels===

In 1967 Murray Leinster wrote a loose novelization of the television series, entitled The Time Tunnel, published by Pyramid Books.  This was followed later in the year by Timeslip: Time Tunnel Adventure #2, the last novel based on the TV series. The front and back covers feature photos from the series.  Leinster had previously written a novel titled Time Tunnel in 1964 for Pyramid, but it was completely unrelated to the television series.
In Time Bomb, an experimental nuclear missile was sent through the Time Tunnel - but something went wrong, and it wound up at the bottom of a pond within Mexico City, in the 1840s. In the present (1968), excavation equipment was moving toward the site - any day a bulldozer blade might set it off, destroying a mighty city and plunging the world into war. Time travelers Tony Newman and Doug Phillips had only one chance to head off disaster - to go through the Time Tunnel and make the accident "unhappen." The trouble was, there was a war on in the past - and the bomb was in enemy territory.[tpl]cite web|url=http://www.thetimetunnel.com/ttbooks.html |title=Novels |publisher=The Time Tunnel |date= |accessdate=2010-11-06[/tpl]

===Graphic Novels===

There were two issues put out by Gold Key Comics (Western Publishing Co.) in 1966-7.  These were reprinted by Hermes Press in 2012.
In Issue #1:
In Issue #2:

===DVD releases===

20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released the entire series on DVD in Region 1 in 2006 in two volumes.The Time Tunnel - Volume One (1966)The Time Tunnel - Volume One (1966)  Volume Two includes the unaired 2002 pilot and the made-for-TV film The Time Travelers as special features.  It is unknown if the DVD's box sets are the full length network versions, but one episode has been edited, "Chase Through Time".
In Region 2, Revelation Films has released the entire series on DVD in the UK in one complete series box set.http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Time-Tunnel-Complete-Series/dp/B004FS27JA/

===Record album===

The Time Tunnel 1967 ABC-TV Japanese book with record album. 33⅓ RPM record licensed and manufactured for exclusive release in Japan by Asahi Sonorama company and was released during the show's original airing in 1967. The record is pressed in blue-vinyl and contains the time-travel drama "Adventure in the Lost World." The highlight of this package is the colorful 12-page booklet which showcases original storybook artwork of the record's episode with the intrepid time travelers being terrorized by rampaging dinosaurs and angry cavemen.

===Soundtrack album===

An album of music from the series, featuring the episodes "Rendezvous With Yesterday" (tracks 2-4) and "The Death Merchant" (tracks 5 and 6) was released by GNP Crescendo as part of the collection The Fantasy Worlds of Irwin Allen.

===Games===

The Time Tunnel 1966 boxed board game from Ideal Toys (No. 2326-7). The playing board design shows characters and events from the prehistoric era into the future. The box insert has a spinner board and other parts include playing cards, token, and marker disks. The second game is The Time Tunnel: Spin-To-Win, a 1967 boxed board game from Pressman Toys, which features a box insert playing board that has a tunnel-like design representing different past years in history and plastic tops are spun on the playing board to determine "Time Travels."
Pinball games - Bally Manufacturing created a pinball called Time Tunnel in 1971 based loosely on the TV series, but production was stopped due to copyright infringement. The game was re-released with revised artwork as Space Time.

===Other===

==After the original run==

In 1982, five feature length TV movies were put together from 10 complete episodes with portions of the first episode as introductory material. Aliens From Another Planet, was produced using episodes 24 ("Chase Through Time") and 18 ("Visitors From Beyond The Stars").Aliens From Another Planet plot summary Revenge Of The Gods was a compilation of episodes 7 ("Revenge of the Gods") and 20 ("The Walls Of Jericho). Old Legends Never Die edited together episodes 27 ("Merlin The Magician") and 16 ("The Revenge Of Robin Hood"). Kill Or Be Killed comprised episodes 4 ("The Day The Sky Fell In") and 17 ("Kill Two By Two"). Raiders From The Moon was compiled from episodes 28 ("The Kidnappers") and 2 ("One Way To The Moon"). In the U.S., they can now be seen on the Encore Action cable network at various times.

==Remakes==

Two attempts were made to resurrect the show.  One produced a pilot episode, but neither resulted in a new series.

===2002 remake===

In 2002, Fox showed interest in remaking this series. A pilot was produced by Twentieth Century Fox Television, Fox Television Studios and Regency Television in association with Irwin Allen Properties.  Executive Producers were Kevin Burns and Jon Jashni.  Sheila Allen was credited as one of the producers.  It was not picked by Fox, in order to make room in its schedule for Joss Whedon's Firefly.
The new series had a darker and serious tone than the original 1966 series. Doug Phillips David Conrad is the main character, and Tony Newman is now Toni Newman, a female minor character.  The unaired pilot episode is available on DVD from Fox Home Entertainment on The Time Tunnel: Volume Two, Disc Four.
In this remake, the 2002 Time Tunnel is a Department of Energy research project into nuclear fusion, which produces nearly limitless energy.  When they initiated the reactor (an event not shown in the episode), it caused an unintended "time storm".  For four hours—240 minutes—the time storm was uncontrollably whipping around in the past and changing history.  The DOE was able to anchor one end of the storm by using the Tunnel like a lightning rod.
On their way into the tunnel complex, Flynn tells Doug Phillips, a former friend, that Phillips has been recruited because he has a detailed knowledge of the Battle of Hürtgen Forest.  The head of the Time Tunnel likens their team to FEMA, in that they don't send a team back for a rain storm but they do for hurricanes.  However, they can only go through time to where the other end of the storm is at the current moment, so they have a limited amount of time in which to fix what is wrong and to be retrieved by the Time Tunnel.
The team (Doug, Toni, Flynn, J.D., and Wix) must go back to WWII in 1944, to the Battle of Hürtgen Forest in Germany.  They are to retrieve a person who was moved there by the time storm from 1546.  During the mission, Doug Phillips meets his grandfather, a soldier who will be killed in this battle.  Doug knows this, but cannot tell him and save his life because it would change history.  Toni Newman tells him that she used to have three brothers and two sisters before the time storm accident, but is now an only child.  They find out that the displaced person is a (very confused) medieval monk who is carrying bubonic plague.  When the team is almost captured, two of them have switched to German uniforms and pretend to be Colonel Klink and (Sergeant) Schultz, complete with fake documents. Everyone who came in contact with the monk is given an antibiotic injection and the time ripples stop.  But Flynn has been fatally stabbed, so he reveals that Phillips was a bitter man before the "240", but he now has a family.  Flynn told Phillips this information to give him incentive to keep the timeline the way that it is.The Time Tunnel: Volume Two, Disc Four, side B

====Reality changes due to the time storm====

There are some notable differences between the series world and the real world:

===2006 remake===

The SciFi Channel announced in 2005 that it was going to create a new pilot for its 2006/07 season. Allen's wife, Sheila, and two producers of the 2002 FOX remake (Kevin Burns and Jon Jashni) began work on the new pilot. John Turman (Hulk) wrote the script.IMDb link for 2007 series The series never materialized.

==References==

==External links==


