[[Eric (novel)]]

CATEGORIES: 1990 novels, Bangsian fantasy, Discworld books, 1990s fantasy novels, Works based on the Faust legend

Eric, also known as Faust Eric, is the ninth Discworld novel by Terry Pratchett. It was originally published in 1990BookLore Review - Eric by Terry Pratchett Retrieved 2009-06-9 as a "Discworld story", in a larger format than the other novels and illustrated by Josh Kirby.Amazon.co.uk Eric (Discworld): Terry Pratchett, Josh Kirby Retrieved 2009-05-9 It was later reissued as a normal paperback without any illustrations, and in some cases, with the title given on the cover and title pages simply as Eric. (The page headers, however, continued to alternate between Faust and Eric.)

==Plot summary==

The story is a parody of the tale of Faust,Amazon.com Eric: Terry Pratchett: Books Retrieved 2009-05-9 and follows the events of Sourcery in which the Wizard Rincewind was trapped in the Dungeon Dimensions.
Rincewind wakes in a strange place, having been summoned by the 13-year-old demonologist, Eric Thursley, who wants the mastery of all kingdoms, to meet the most beautiful woman who ever existed, and to live forever. He is disappointed when Rincewind tells him he is unable to deliver any of these things, and embarrassed when Rincewind sees through his disguise. Rincewind is disheartened to learn that the spells to confine the demon summoned are working on him; Eric's parrot tells him that because he was summoned as a demon, he is subject to the same terms.
The arrival of Rincewind's Luggage causes Eric to suspect deceit on Rincewind's part. Eric's demands are renewed; he makes three wishes of Rincewind.  Rincewind insists he cannot grant wishes with the snap of a finger, and discovers to his horror that snapping his fingers really does work.
They discover hell steeped in bureaucracy, where the Demon King Astfgl had decided boredom might be the ultimate form of torture. Rincewind uses his university experience to confuse the demons at their own game, so he and Eric can try to escape.  While crossing through the recently reformed levels of hell (satirical forms of Dante's Inferno) they encounter da Quirm and the parrot, as well as Lavaeolus, who tells them where the exit is. 
The source of Rincewind's demonic powers is revealed to be Lord Vassenego, a Demon Lord leading a secret revolt against Astfgl.  Using Rincewind to keep Astfgl occupied while gathering support amongst the demons, Vassenego confronts his king just as Astfgl finally catches up to Rincewind and Eric.  Vassenego announces the council of demons has made Astfgl "Supreme Life President of Hell", and that he is to plan out the course of action for demons. With Astfgl lost to the bureaucratic prison of his own making, Vassenego takes over as king and releases Rincewind and Eric, so that stories about hell can be told.

==References==

==External links==

 

