[[Joachim Murat]]

CATEGORIES: People from Lot (department), Marshals of France, Princes Murat, Grand Dukes of Berg and Cleves, Monarchs of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, French commanders of the Napoleonic Wars, Executed reigning monarchs, Knights of the Golden Fleece, Cavalry commanders, Occitan people, House of Murat, Members of the Sénat conservateur, Recipients of the Order of St. Andrew, Admirals of France, French invasion of Russia, 1767 births, 1815 deaths, 19th-century executions by Italy, Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery, Executed people from Midi-Pyrénées, People executed by the Kingdom of Naples, People executed by Italy by firing squad, French people executed by firing squad

Marshal of France and Grand Admiral or Admiral of France Joachim-Napoléon Murat ([tpl]IPA-fr|ʒoakim napoleɔ̃ myʁa[/tpl] (born Joachim Murat; [tpl]lang-it|Gioacchino Napoleone Murat[/tpl]; 25 March 1767 – 13 October 1815) 1st Prince Murat, was Grand Duke of Berg from 1806 to 1808 and then King of Naples from 1808 to 1815. He received his titles in part by being the brother-in-law of Napoleon Bonaparte, through marriage to Napoleon's youngest sister, Caroline Bonaparte. He was noted as a daring and charismatic cavalry officer as well as a flamboyant dresser and was known as "the Dandy King".

==Early life==

Joachim Murat was born on 25 March 1767 in La Bastide-Fortunière,Chavanon, Jules and Georges Saint-Yves, Joachim Murat (1767–1815), (Libraire Hachette, 1905), 4. (renamed Labastide-Murat after its renowned citizen), in the Lot department of France, in the former province of Guyenne, to Pierre Murat-Jordy, (d. 27 July 1799), an affluent farmer and an innkeeper,Ramsey Weston Phipps. Armies of the First French Republic.  London: Greenwood Publishers, 1926, vol. 1, p. 146-147. and his wife Jeanne Loubières (La Bastide Fortunière, b. 1722 – La Bastide Fortunière, d. 11 March 1806), daughter of Pierre Loubières and of his wife Jeanne Viellescazes. Pierre Murat-Jordy was the son of Guillaume Murat (1692 – 1754) and his wife Marguerite Herbeil (d. 1755); paternal grandson of Pierre Murat, born in 1634, and wife Catherine Badourès, who died in 1697; and maternal grandson of Bertrand Herbeil and wife Anne Roques.
Joachim Murat's parents intended he pursue a career in the church, and he was taught by the parish priest, after which he won a place at the College of Saint-Michel at Cahors when he was ten years old.  He then entered seminary of the Lazarists at Toulouse, but when a regiment of cavalry passed through the city in 1787, he ran away from seminary and enlisted on 23 February 1787 in the Chasseurs des Ardennes, which the following year became known as the Chasseurs de Champagne, also known as the 12th Chasseurs. In 1789, an affair forced him to resign, and he returned to his family, becoming a clerk to a haberdasher at Saint-Ceré.Phipps, p. 146

==French Revolutionary Wars==

By 1790, he had joined the National Guard, and when the Fête of the Nation was organized on 14 July 1790, the Canton of Montaucon sent Murat as its representative. Then, he became reinstated into his old regiment. Part of the 12th Chasseurs had been sent to Montmédy to protect the royal family on its flight to Varennes, meaning regiment had to defend its honor and loyalty to the Republic; Murat and the regiment's adjutant made a speech to the assembly at Toul to that effect.Phipps, p. 146.  In 1792, he joined the Constitutional Guard, but left it that same year; his departure was attributed to various causes, including his constant quarreling and dueling, although he claimed he left to avoid punishment for being absent without leave.Phipps, p. 147.
An ardent Republican, Murat wrote to his brother in 1791 stating he was preoccupied with revolutionary affairs and would sooner die than cease to be a patriot. Upon his departure from the Constitutional Guard, he reported to the Committee of Surveillance of the Constitutional Assembly that the Guard was guilty of treason and that his Lieutenant Colonel, a man named Descours, had encouraged him to serve in the émigré army of Louis Joseph, Prince of Condé, then stationed in Koblenz.Phipps, p. 147. This garnered for him the support of the Republicans, for he rejoined his former regiment and was promoted to Corporal in April of that year, and to Sergeant in May.Phipps, p. 147.  By 19 November 1792, he was 25 years old and elated at his latest promotion.  As a sous-lieutenant, he thought, his family must recognize that he had no great tendency for the priesthood, and he was hoping to prove that he had not been wrong in wishing to be a soldier.  One of the Ministers had accused him of being an aristocrat, confusing him with the noble family of Murat d'Auvergne, an accusation that continued to haunt him for the next several years.Phipps, pp. 148-49.

===13 Vendémiaire===

In the autumn of 1795, three years after King Louis XVI of France was deposed, royalist and counter-revolutionaries organised an armed uprising.  On 3 October, General Napoleon Bonaparte, who was stationed in Paris, was named commander of the French National Convention's defending forces.  This constitutional convention, after a long period of emergency rule, was striving to establish a more stable and permanent government in the uncertain period after the Reign of Terror. Bonaparte tasked Murat with the gathering of artillery from a suburb outside the control of the government's forces. Murat managed to take the cannons of the Camp des Sablons and transport them to the centre of Paris while avoiding the rioters. The use of these cannons – the famous "whiff of grapeshot" – on 5 October allowed Bonaparte to save the members of the National Convention.Connelly, pp. 20-21. For this success, Joachim Murat was made chef de brigade (colonel) and thereafter remained one of Napoleon's best officers.

===Italian and Egyptian campaigns===

In 1796, with the situation in the capital and government apparently stabilised and the war going poorly (See also: French Revolutionary Wars), Napoleon lobbied to join the armies attempting to secure the revolution against the invading monarchist forces. Murat then went with Bonaparte to northern Italy, initially as his aide-de-camp, and was later named commander of the cavalry during the many campaigns against the Austrians and their allies. These forces were waging war on France and seeking to restore a monarchy in revolutionary France. His valour and his daring cavalry charges later earned him the rank of général in these important campaigns, the battles of which became famous as Bonaparte constantly used speed of maneuver to fend off and eventually defeat individually superior opposing armies closing in on the French forces from several directions. Thus, Murat's skills in no small part helped establish Bonaparte's legendary fame and enhance his popularity with the French people.
Murat commanded the cavalry of the French Egyptian expedition of 1798, again under Bonaparte. The expedition's strategic goal was to threaten Britain's rich holdings in India. (Some had been taken from France during the Seven Years' War). However, the overall effort ended prematurely because of lack of logistical support with the defeat of the French fleet due to British sea power (See: Battle of the Nile). After the sea battle, Napoleon led his troops on land toward Europe (via Palestine and thence Ottoman Turkey), but was recalled by the Directory (at least in part) as it feared an invasion by Britain. Abbé Sieyès also saw Bonaparte as an ally against a resurgent Jacobin movement, and so the expeditionary army was turned over to a subordinate.
The remaining non-military expedition staff officers, including Murat, and Bonaparte returned to France, eluding various British fleets in five frigates. A short while later, Murat played an important, even pivotal, role in Bonaparte's "coup within a coup" of 18 Brumaire (9 November 1799), when Napoleon first assumed national power.  Along with two others (including Director Abbé Sieyès), Napoleon Bonaparte set aside the five-man directory government, establishing the three-man French Consulate government.
Murat married Caroline Bonaparte in a civil ceremony on 20 January 1800 at Mortefontaine and religiously on 4 January 1802 in Paris, thus becoming a son-in-law of Letizia Ramolino as well as brother-in-law to Joseph Bonaparte, Napoleon I of France, Lucien Bonaparte, Elisa Bonaparte, Louis Bonaparte, Pauline Bonaparte and Jérôme Bonaparte.

==Napoleonic wars==

Napoleon made Murat a Marshal of France on 18 May 1804, and also granted him the title of "First Horseman of Europe". He was created Prince of the Empire in 1805, appointed Grand Duke of Berg and Cleves on 15 March 1806 and held this title until 1 August 1808, when he was named King of Naples and Sicily. He was in charge of the French Army in Madrid when the popular 2nd May uprising that started the Peninsular War happened.
Murat was equally useful in Napoleon's invasion of Russia (1812) and in the Battle of Leipzig (1813). However, after France's defeat at Leipzig, Murat reached an agreement with the Austrian Empire in order to save his own throne.
During the Hundred Days, he realized that the European powers, meeting as the Congress of Vienna, had the intention to remove him and return the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily to their pre-Napoleonic rulers. Murat deserted his new allies and, after issuing a proclamation to the Italian patriots in Rimini, moved north to fight against the Austrians in the Neapolitan War to strengthen his rule in Italy by military means. He was defeated by Frederick Bianchi, a general of Francis I of Austria, in the Battle of Tolentino (2–3 May 1815).

==Death==

He fled to Corsica after Napoleon's fall. Joined by around a thousand followers, he hoped to regain control of Naples by fomenting an insurrection in Calabria. Arriving at the Calabrian port of Pizzo, Murat attempted to rally support in the town square, but things went very wrong. The crowd was hostile and he was attacked by an old woman blaming him for the loss of her son. Calabria had been badly hit by Murat's repression of local piracy and brigandage during his reign.
Forces of the king, Ferdinand IV of Naples, arrested him, and he was put on trial for treason. He was eventually sentenced to death by firing squad at the Castello di Pizzo, Calabria.
 When the fatal moment arrived, Murat walked with a firm step to the place of execution, as calm, as unmoved, as if he had been going to an ordinary review. He would not accept a chair, nor suffer his eyes to be bound. "I have braved death (said he) too often to fear it." He stood upright, proudly and undauntedly, with his countenance towards the soldiers; and when all was ready, he kissed a cameo on which the head of his wife was engraved, and gave the word — thus,  
  «Soldats! Faites votre devoir! Droit au cœur mais épargnez le visage. Feu!»

 
 "Soldiers! Do your duty! Straight to the heart but spare the face. Fire!"[tpl]cite book|last=Murat|first=Caroline|title=My Memoirs|year=1910|location=London|pages=23[/tpl] 

Murat is memorialised by a grave in Père Lachaise Cemetery, though it is claimed that he is not actually buried there but that his body was lost or destroyed after his execution.[tpl]Citation needed|date=October 2008[/tpl] Others[tpl]Who|date=October 2008[/tpl] say he was buried in a church in Pizzo, making the removal of his body possible later on.

==Gallery==

File:Joachim Murat (by Jean Baptiste Joseph Wicar).jpg|Murat in French uniform
File:Murat.jpg|Murat in hussar uniform and a black Page.
File:Murat by Gros.jpg|Murat in Polish uniform.
File:François Pascal Simon Gérard 005.jpg|Murat as a Marshal of the Empire.
File:Joachim Murat entering Florence, 19 January 1801.jpg|Joachim Murat entering Florence, 19 January 1801
Image:Joachim Murat (Order of Two-Siciles).jpg|Murat as King of Naples.

==Coats of arms==

File:Blason Joachim Murat Grand-Duc de Clèves et de Berg (Orn ext).svg|Coat of arms as Grand Duke of Berg.
File:Great Coat of Arms of Joachim Murat as King of Naples.svg|Coat of arms as King of Naples.

==Titles and styles==

==Children==

Murat and Caroline had four children:

==Relatives==

He had a brother named Pierre Murat (La Bastide-Fortunière, 27 November 1748 – La Bastide-Fortunière, 8 October 1792), who married at La Bastide-Fortunière on 26 February 1783 Louise d'Astorg (La Bastide-Fortunière, 23 October 1762 – 31 May 1832), daughter of Aymeric d'Astorg, born in 1721, and wife Marie Alanyou, paternal granddaughter of Antoine d'Astorg, born  18 November 1676, and wife Marie de Mary (4 May 1686 – 7 October 1727) and maternal granddaughter of Jean Alanyou and wife Louise de Valon.
His other brother named André Murat (1760 – 1841) was titled 1st Count Murat in 1810.
Pierre and Louise were the parents of Marie Louise, Pierre Adrien (d.1805), Marie Radegonde (d.1800), Thomas Joachim and Marie Antoinette Murat, whom Emperor Napoleon I arranged to marry Charles, Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen; Karl III and Marie were the parents of Charles Anthony, Prince of Hohenzollern from whom descended Stephanie of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen Queen of Portugal; her brother Carol I of Romania and Carol I nephew Albert I of Belgium.
Another descendant of note is his great-great-great-grandson, the American actor René Auberjonois.

==In popular culture==

In the 1941 Errol Flynn movie They Died With Their Boots On, a fictional account of the life of George Armstrong Custer, Murat is credited with being Custer's role model.
Murat is included as a minor character in Tolstoy's War and Peace, introduced in the prelude to the battle of Borodino.
William R. Forstchen's novel, The Forgotten War, establishes that Murat has a descendant, Commodore Lucien Murat, who lived in the 22nd and 23rd centuries of the Star Trek universe. Commodore Murat was the commanding officer of the starship USS Verdun.

==Footnotes==

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==

|-
[tpl]s-reg|fr[/tpl] of the First French Empire


