[[Alf Morgans]]

CATEGORIES: 1850 births, 1933 deaths, Members of the Western Australian Legislative Assembly, Western Australian local government politicians, People from Machen, Premiers of Western Australia, Welsh politicians, Welsh emigrants to Australia, People from Coolgardie, Western Australia, Treasurers of Western Australia

Alfred Edward Morgans (17 February 1850 – 10 August 1933) was Premier of Western Australia for just 32 days, from 21 November to 23 December 1901.

==Early life and career==

Alf Morgans was born at Ochr Churith Machen Lower, Machen, Monmouthshire in Wales (UK) on 17 February 1850.  He was educated at private schools and subsequently attended the Welsh School of Mines. After completing his studies, he was apprenticed to a mechanical engineering firm at Ebbw Vale.  
On 19 March 1872, he married Fanny Ridler at Gloucester in England. In 1878, Morgans' employers sent him to Mexico to supervise their gold and silver mines.  He worked in Central America for a period of 18 years, during which time he learned to speak Spanish fluently, and developed an interest in Mexico's natural and archaeological history.  He unearthed a number of Aztec pieces, some of which he donated to the British Museum.
Morgans moved to Western Australia in 1896 as a representative of Morgans' Syndicate Ltd. to inspect mining properties for London-based investors seeking sound investment opportunities. He acquired numerous properties and mining interests throughout the state, including Westralia Mount Morgans, and he was generally considered to be a leading authority on mining investment.

==Political career==

On 4 May 1897, Morgans was elected to the Legislative Assembly seat of Coolgardie.  
In parliament, he was a supporter of Premier Sir John Forrest.  After Forrest resigned from state politics, the former supporters of Forrest continued to work together; the group became known under the moniker of ministerialists.  In November 1901, the ministerialists defeated Premier George Leake on a no-confidence vote, and he was compelled to resign.  However, they were initially unable to agree on a nominee for premier, and when the governor invited Frederick Henry Piesse to form a government, he could not secure enough support.  
The ministerialists eventually agreed on Morgans as a compromise candidate, and he took office as premier and colonial treasurer on 21 November 1901, despite having never previous held any ministerial office.  
However, in the subsequent ministerial by-election1, supporters of Leake stood against Morgans' newly appointed cabinet, and three of the six new ministers were defeated.  Morgans then asked Governor Lawley for a dissolution of the Assembly, but this was refused.  He resigned as premier on 23 December 1901, and Leake took office again, this time with clearly defined support.  Morgans did not re-nominate at the subsequent election.

==Diplomatic career==

Alf Morgans' life after politics consisted of a number of consular-diplomatic appointments in Western Australia.  From 1910 to 1917, he was Austro-Hungarian Consul for Western Australia; in 1915 he was also Vice-Consul for Spain.  From 1918 to 1920 he was a member of the North Fremantle Municipal Council and also acting Consular Agent for the United States of America. He remained in the position of Consular Agent for the United States until 1930.  
He died on 10 August 1933 at South Perth in Western Australia.

==Notes==

1. Until 1947, newly appointed ministers were required to resign and stand for re-election.

==References==


