[[Royal Armouries Ms. I.33]]

CATEGORIES: 14th-century illuminated manuscripts, Combat treatises, Historical European martial arts, Swordsmanship

Royal Armouries Ms. I.33  (also known as "the Tower manuscript" because it was kept in the Tower of London during 1950-1996; also referred to as British Museum No. 14 E iii, No. 20, D. vi) is the earliest known surviving European fechtbuch (combat manual), and one of the oldest surviving martial arts manuals dealing with armed combat worldwide.There are some passing references to armed combat in ancient treatises on warfare, e.g. in Publius Flavius Vegetius Renatus. There are also long lists of weapons in early medieval Indian texts such as the Agni Purana, but no systematic treatise on fighting technique. Technical descriptions of Chinese martial arts which survive from the Han Dynasty (such as the Six Chapters of Hand Fighting, 1st century) are on unarmed combat exclusively. The 13th-century Indian Malla Purana is also on unarmed combat. Technical descriptions of armed fighting in Asia date to the 16th century or later (e.g. the 16th-century Korean Ji Xiao Xin Shu, the 17th-century Japanese The Book of Five Rings).
It was created around 1300 in Franconia and It remained in a Franconian monastery (presumably in Eastern Franconia) until the mid-16th century. It is first mentioned by Henricus a Gunterrodt in his De veriis principiis artis dimicatoriae of 1579, where he reports it to have been acquired (looted) by a friend of his, one Johannes Herbart of Würzburg when serving in the force of Albert Alcibiades, Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach  in the campaigns of 1552/3.
From the 17th century, the manuscript was part of the ducal library of Gotha (signature Cod. Membr. I. no. 115) until it disappeared in World War II and resurfaced at a Sotheby's auction in 1950, where it was purchased by the Royal Armouries. The author of the treatise may be a cleric called Lutegerus (viz. a Latinised form of the German proper name Liutger).
The 32 parchment folia (64 pages) of the treatise expound a martial arts system of defensive and offensive techniques between a master and a pupil, referred to as sacerdos (priest) and scolaris (student), each armed with a sword and a buckler, drawn in ink and watercolour and accompanied with Latin text, interspersed with German fencing terms. On the last two pages, the pupil is replaced by a woman called Walpurgis.
The date of the manuscript is variously given as late 13th century or as  early 14th century, with a consensus range of about 1290-1320.The manuscript is dated to the "late 13th century" in the description by Royal Armouries. Alphonse Lhotsky in a handwritten note suggested the late 13th century and identified the scribe as a secretary to the bishop of Würzburg.
The Latin text of the manuscript is written in a clerical hand, using the various sigla which were standard at the time (but which fell out of use at the end of the medieval period; an image from the manuscript (the second image on fol 26r) was copied into Codex Guelf 125.16.Extrav. in the 1600s by a draughtsman who under his drawing stated that he could not decipher the Latin text).

==Contents==

The fencing system is based on a number of wards (custodie) which are answered by defensive postures (obsessiones). The wards are numbered 1 to 7 on the first two pages and supplemented by various 'special' wards later in the text. The seven basic wards are:
The German terms appearing in the Latin text are the following:
Sporadic dialectal elements in these terms (notably nucken and halpschilt) suggest a location of composition consistent with the reported discovery in a Franconian monastery in the wider area of Würzburg.

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==


