[[Travel survey]]

CATEGORIES: Transportation planning, Market research, Travel, Social psychology, Surveys

A travel survey (or travel diary or travel behavior inventory) is a survey of individual travel behavior.  Most surveys collect information about an individual (socio-economic, demographic, etc.), their household (size, structure, relationships), and a diary of their journeys on a given day (their start and end location, start and end time, mode of travel, accompanyment and purpose of travel).
Major travel surveys are conducted in metropolitan areas typically once a decade. Some regions, notably metropolitan Seattle, Washington conduct a panel survey, which interviews the same people year after year, to see how their particular behavior evolves over time.

==Recent or continuous city-wide travel surveys==

Auckland, New Zealand - A travel survey was conducted in 2006 and involved 6,000 households in the greater Auckland region.Auckland Travel Survey
Brisbane, Australia - The South East Queensland Travel Survey collects travel data in the Greater Brisbane region and the neighbouring areas of Gold Coast and Sunshine Coast. The continuous survey commenced in 2003 and surveys around 6,000 households every two years.Queensland Transport
Hobart, Australia - The Greater Hobart Household Travel Survey collects information from 200 households each month.Tasmanian Dept of Transport
London, United Kingdom - The London Travel Demand Survey covers 8,000 households annually. Data is collected via face to face interviews.Transport for London
Sydney, Australia - The continuous Household Travel Survey collects travel data annually for approximately 3,500 households in the Sydney Greater Metropolitan Region.NSW Ministry of Transport
Washington, United States - The Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments conducted a 10,000 household survey in 2007.MWCOG

==Recent or continuous province/state-wide travel surveys==

Southern Ontario, the Transportation Tomorrow SurveyData Management Group - University of Toronto was conducted in 2005-6 (two phases: September 2005 -> January 2006 and September 2006 -> February 2007). This is a repeat survey using essentially the same instrument as conducted in 1986, 1991, 1996, 2001 and most recently 2006 where 149,631 households comprise the final database.  The survey was conducted using telephone interviews with an advance letter sent to households to solicit their participation.

==Recent or continuous country-wide travel surveys==

Denmark's most recent National Travel was in 2006. The interview was conducted using the internet and telephone interviews.Danish Transport Research Institute
Germany is conducting its National Travel Survey since 1994 on a yearly basis.The German Mobility Panel Each household member fills in a travel diary in which he records each trip made during the course of one week. Despite this yearly survey there is another non regular scheduled survey which is conducted again in 2008. 25,000 households are expected to participate.travelsurveymethods.org
The Netherlands National Travel Survey surveyed around 34,500 households in 2003. The survey has been conducted yearly since 1985, but with some changes in methodology. Survey forms are mailed out, with follow-up motivational phone calls.Institute for Road Safety Research
In New Zealand the Ministry of Transport annually surveys 4,600 households for a two-day period. Data is collected via face to face interviews.NZ Ministry of Transport
The United Kingdom Department for Transport conducts the National Travel Survey UK Department for Transport
The United States last conducted the National Household Travel Survey in 2009.National Household Travel Survey
South Africa conducted its first National Household Travel Survey in 2003. Successful interviews were held with 45,000 households.Dept of Transport, South Africa
Sweden's most recent National Travel Survey (RES) was conducted in 2006-06.Sika Institute

==See also==

==Notes and references==

==External links==


