[[Prince Edward Viaduct]]

CATEGORIES: Railway bridges in Ontario, Bridges completed in 1918, Bridges completed in 1966, Bridges in Toronto, Don Valley, Road-rail bridges, Viaducts in Canada, Deck arch bridges, Concrete bridges in Canada, Road bridges in Ontario

The Prince Edward Viaduct System, commonly referred to as the Bloor Viaduct or the viaduct, is the name of a truss arch bridge system in Toronto, Ontario, Canada that connects Bloor Street East, on the west side of the system, with Danforth Avenue on the east. The Don Valley phase of the system, the most recognizable, spans the Don River Valley, crossing over (from west to east) the Bayview Avenue Extension, the Don River, and the Don Valley Parkway.
The Prince Edward Viaduct system also includes the Rosedale Valley phase (a smaller bridge carrying Bloor Street over the Rosedale Ravine and referred to as the Rosedale Valley Bridge) and the Sherbourne Phase, an embankment built to extend Bloor Street East to the Rosedale Ravine from  Sherbourne Street.
The Bloor Street-Rosedale Valley Bridge is a western extension of the Prince Edward Viaduct. The bridge, officially known as the Rosedale Valley Phase of the Prince Edward Viaduct System, runs west of the Bloor Street Viaduct and ends west of Parliament Street. The bridge stone work is similar to the Bloor Street Viaduct and another bridge on O'Connor Drive (over Taylor Creek) to the east of the Don River.
The roadway has five lanes (three eastbound and two westbound) with a bicycle lane in each direction.Photo of westbound traffic  The subway level connects Broadview Station in the east with Castle Frank and Sherbourne Stations to the west.

==Design==

Designed by Edmund W. Burke, the Prince Edward Viaduct is a three hinged concrete-steel arch bridge, with a total span of 494 metres at 40 metres above the Don Valley. The bridge consists of a deck, made up of transverse beams and I-girders, which transfer load to column supports. The column supports then transfer the load to the trusses within the arches, which transfer the load to the arches themselves. Finally, the arches transfer their load through large hinges, which transfer load to a concrete pillar, and eventually to the ground.
In addition to the Don River, the Don Valley Parkway, Bayview Avenue, two railway lines, an electrical transmission line, and a bicycle trail all pass under the bridge spans.

==History==

===Construction===

Referendums on the construction of the Prince Edward Viaduct were held in Toronto in every year from 1910 to 1913, with residents voting against its construction in 1912 by 59 votes and in favour in 1913 by 9236 votes.[ref]
