[[Prince Ernest Augustus of Hanover (born 1954)]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, Living people, People from Hanover, House of Grimaldi, House of Hanover, Hanoverian princes

Ernst August, Prince of Hanover, Duke of Brunswick and Luneburg, Royal Prince of Great Britain and Ireland (Ernst August Albert Paul Otto Rupprecht Oskar Berthold Friedrich-Ferdinand Christian-Ludwig Prinz von Hannover Herzog zu Braunschweig und Lüneburg Königlicher Prinz von Großbritannien und IrlandIn 1919 royalty and nobility were mandated to lose their privileges in Germany, hereditary titles were to be legally borne thereafter only as part of the surname, according to Article 109 of the Weimar Constitution. born 26 February 1954) is the head of the deposed royal"Hanover, House of." Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopaedia Britannica Ultimate Reference Suite.  Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, 2010.Royalty Who Wait by Olga S. Opfell, McFarland, 2001, p.42 House of Hanover, a younger branch of the House of Welf, and claimant to the thrones of the former Kingdom of Hanover and the former Duchy of Brunswick. He is the third husband of Princess Caroline of Monaco, heiress presumptive to the throne of Monaco. His wealth is estimated at £5 billion."Punchy Prince Ernst August snogs young woman on Thai beach", Austrian Times, 1 July 2010.

==Name and ancestry==

Ernst August was born in Hanover the eldest son of Ernst August, Hereditary Prince of Brunswick (1914–1987) and his first wife, Princess Ortrud of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg (1925–1980). He was christened, Ernst August Albert Paul Otto Rupprecht Oskar Berthold Friedrich-Ferdinand Christian-Ludwig.Debrett's peerage & baronetage 2008, p. 117.
As the senior male-line descendant of George V of Hanover (and hence also of George III of the United Kingdom) Ernst August is head of the House of Hanover (and the House of Welf). As such he is the claimant to the former thrones of the Kingdom of Hanover and of the Duchy of Brunswick. In Prussia (which had annexed Hanover in 1866), "the privileges of former noble status" were dispensed with on 23 June 1920 in execution of the 1919 mandate of the Weimar Constitution,Preußische Gesetzsammlung 1920, §1, nr. 32, p. 367 Unequal and Morganatic Marriages in German Law: After 1919. (German). Retrieved 10 August 2011 titles being retained only as surnames.Almanach de Gotha, Braunschweig-Lüneburg (Gotha: Justus Perthes, 1944), pages 38-39, 169 (French)
The title of Prince of Great Britain and Ireland was accorded ad personam to his father, Ernest Augustus, Prince of Hanover (1914–1987), and his father's siblings by King George V of the United Kingdom on 17 June 1914.Heraldica.org. Velde, François Styles of the members of the British royal family:Documents, Children of the duke and duchess of Brunswick (June 17, 1914) His father was not deprived of that title under the Titles Deprivation Act 1917, but the hereditary Dukedom of Cumberland and Teviotdale and the Earldom of Armagh, borne in 1917 by his paternal great-grandfather, were suspended. However, on 29 August 1931, his grandfather Ernest Augustus, Duke of Brunswick, as head of the House of Hanover, declared the formal resumption, for himself and his dynastic descendants, of use of his former British princely title as a secondary title of pretense. He still styles himself ‘Royal Prince of Great Britain and Ireland’.Ernst August (geb.1954) Prinz von Hannover at welfen.de (German) 
As heir of the last Duke of Cumberland and Teviotdale and Earl of Armagh, Ernst August has the right to petition under the Titles Deprivation Act 1917 for the restoration of his ancestors' suspended British peerages, but to date he has not done so. His father, also called Ernst August, did, however, successfully claim British nationality after World War II by virtue of a hitherto overlooked (and since repealed) provision of the Sophia Naturalization Act 1705 (Attorney-General v HRH Prince Ernest Augustus of Hanover 1957 1 All ER 49).
Ernst August is also a great-grandson of the last German emperor, Wilhelm II. Until his marriage to Princess Caroline, he was 385th in the line of succession to the British throne. Upon his marriage to Princess Caroline, a Roman Catholic, he was excluded from the line of succession under provisions of the Act of Settlement 1701. This, however, does not apply to his two sons, from his first protestant marriage, who remain in the line of succession.
He is also a nephew of Frederica of Hanover (1917–1981), queen consort of the Hellenes, and thus a first cousin of Constantine II of Greece and his sister Sophia, Queen of Spain.

==Family==

Ernst August first married, civilly on 28 August 1981 and religiously on 30 August 1981, Chantal Hochuli (b. 2 June 1955 in Zurich), heiress to a Swiss chocolate fortune. They had two sons:
Ernst August and Chantal Hochuli divorced on 23 October 1997.
He married secondly, civilly in Monaco on 23 January 1999 Princess Caroline of Monaco, who was pregnant at the time with their daughter:
As he was born in the male-line of George II of Great Britain he is bound by the Royal Marriages Act 1772. Thus, before his marriage to Princess Caroline, he officially requested permission to marry of Queen Elizabeth II, and on 11 January 1999, the aforementioned sovereign issued an Order in Council, "My Lords, I do hereby declare My Consent to a Contract of Matrimony between His Royal Highness Prince Ernst August Albert of Hanover, Duke of Brunswick-Luneburg and Her Serene Highness Princess Caroline Louise Marguerite of Monaco..." Without the Royal Assent, the marriage would have been void in Britain where his family owns property and his lawful descendants remain in succession to both the British crown and the two suspended peerages. Similarly the Monégasque court officially notified the government of France of Caroline's marriage to Ernst August,  receiving assurance that there was no objection in compliance with the (since defunct) Franco-Monegasque Treaty of 1918. Moreover, in order for Caroline to retain her claim to the throne of Monaco and to transmit succession rights to future offspring, the couple were also obliged to obtain the approval of yet a third nation, in  the form of official consent to the marriage of Caroline's father, Rainier III, as Sovereign Prince of Monaco.  
In September 2009 it was reported in the French and English press that Ernst August has been living separately from his wife Caroline, who has returned to Monaco.Allen, Peter Princess Caroline 'to divorce' third husband reigniting fears of Monaco royal curse Daily Mail 12 September 2009

==Controversy==

He was photographed urinating on the Turkish Pavilion at the Expo 2000 event in Hanover, causing a diplomatic incident and a complaint from the Turkish Embassy accusing him of insulting the Turkish people. He sued those who published (Bild-Zeitung) the photo for invasion of privacy. He was awarded 9,900 euros.Willsher, Kim Royalty reaps riches in strict privacy laws The Standard, 26 July 2006 The paper had previously published a photo of Ernst August urinating outside a hospital in Austria.
In 2004, he was convicted of aggravated assault and causing grievous bodily harm after beating a man with a knuckleduster.Jüttner, Julia, "Ernst August's Case Heads to Court -- Again" Spiegel Online, 19 May 2008[ref]"
Boyes, Roger, "Prince Ernst August demands retrial after knuckleduster claim", The Times, 20 May 2008.[/ref]

==Health==

On Monday, 3 April 2005, Ernst August was admitted to hospital with acute pancreatitis. The next day, he fell into a deep coma, two days before the death of his father-in-law, Rainier III, Prince of Monaco. On Friday, 8 April 2005, hospital officials reported that he was no longer in a coma but remained in intensive care. A report the same day on BBC World described his condition as "serious but not irreversible." On 9 April 2005, according to a report on BBC, a hospital spokesman reported that Ernst August was receiving "permanent medical care."[tpl]Citation needed|date=February 2007[/tpl] He has since been released and was subsequently seen in public with his wife.

==Titles and styles==

In Germany, the legal privileges of royalty and nobility were abolished in 1919; thereafter for legal purposes, hereditary titles form part of the name only.The Reich Constitution of August 11th 1919 (Weimar Constitution) with Modifications, Article 109. 
While descendants of non-dynastic marriages may bear "Prinz/Prinzessin von Hannover Herzog/Herzogin zu Braunschweig und Lüneburg Königlicher Prinz/Prinzessin von Großbritannien und Irland" as surnames, they are not recognised as bearing titles or membership in the House of Hanover according to the house rules. Ernest Augustus however received a dispensation from his father for his first marriage.

==Honours==

==Ancestry==

 
 

==References==

==External links==

|-


