[[Hal Jackman]]

CATEGORIES: 1932 births, Living people, University of Toronto alumni, Alumni of the London School of Economics, Businesspeople from Ontario, Canadian Business Hall of Fame, Chancellors of the University of Toronto, Lieutenant Governors of Ontario, Officers of the Order of Canada, Members of the Order of Ontario, Recipients of the Canadian Forces Decoration, Members of the United Church of Canada, People from Toronto, Upper Canada College alumni

The Honourable Henry Newton Rowell "Hal" Jackman, OC, O.Ont, CD (born June 10, 1932, in Toronto, Ontario) served as the 25th Lieutenant Governor of Ontario from 1991 to 1997. He is the son of former Member of Parliament Harry Jackman and philanthropist Mary Rowell Jackman. His mother was the daughter of another former Member of Parliament, Newton Wesley Rowell. His sister, Nancy Ruth, is a philanthropist who was appointed to the Senate in 2005.
Jackman was educated at Pickering College, the University of Toronto Schools, Upper Canada College (where he was a member of Jackson's House), the University of Toronto Faculty of Law, and the London School of Economics. 
He was chairman of the board of National Trust Company and  The Empire Life Insurance Company, plus several other prominent Canadian corporations. In 1964 he married Maruja Trinidad Duncan.
Jackman was a longtime fundraiser for the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada, and became a supporter of the Canadian Alliance when it was formed prior to the 2000 election. He was also an advocate of the Unite the Right movement, which resulted in the creation of the Conservative Party of Canada.

==Viceregal appointment==

Jackman was appointed  Lieutenant Governor by Governor General Ray Hnatyshyn, on the advice of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, in 1991, and became a Member of the Order of Canada the same year. He focused on support for the arts, history and national unity during his time in office. 
He served until 1997, and was then appointed to the Order of Ontario in 1998.  He was promoted to Officer in the Order of Canada in the year 2000.
Jackman did not serve in the military, but received the Canadian Forces Decoration in recognition of his appointment as a former honorary colonel of the Governor General's Horse Guards, a Toronto militia unit.
He was named chancellor of the University of Toronto in 1997. Following his retirement from that post, he was elected the fourth visitor of Massey College.

==External links==


