[[Peace Arch]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures completed in 1921, Buildings and structures in Surrey, British Columbia, Buildings and structures in Whatcom County, Washington, Canada–United States border crossings, Monuments and memorials in British Columbia, Monuments and memorials in Washington (state), Buildings and structures on the National Register of Historic Places in Washington (state), Interstate 5, U.S. Route 99, Visitor attractions in Whatcom County, Washington, 1921 sculptures, Peace monuments and memorials

The Peace Arch is a monument situated on the Canada – United States border between the communities of Blaine, Washington and Surrey, British Columbia. The Peace Arch, which stands
[tpl]convert|20.5|m[/tpl] tall, was built by Sam Hill and dedicated in September 1921, and commemorates the signing of the Treaty of Ghent in 1814. The monument is built on the exact United States – Canada boundary, between Interstate 5 and Highway 99, in the grass median between the northbound and southbound lanes. The Peace Arch has the flags of the U.S. and Canada mounted on its crown, and two inscriptions on both sides of its frieze. The inscription on the U.S. side of the Peace Arch reads "Children of a common mother", and the words on the Canadian side read "Brethren dwelling together in unity".  Within the arch, each side has an iron gate hinged on either side of the border with an inscription above reading "May these gates never be closed". 
Peace Arch Park consists of Peace Arch Provincial Park on the Canadian side and Peace Arch State Park on the American side of the border.  Within the park is a major border crossing (between Interstate 5 on the U.S. side and British Columbia Highway 99 on the Canadian side) which has never closed, symbolizing a long history of peace between the two nations. In Canada, the crossing is officially named Douglas in honour of Sir James Douglas, the first governor of the Colony of British Columbia. Because of the Peace Arch monument, however, the border crossing between Surrey and Blaine is popularly known as the "Peace Arch Border Crossing", one of the busiest border crossings between Canada and the United States. It is the busiest such crossing west of Detroit.
The monument and surrounding park is considered an international park. As such, visitors do not require either a passport or visa to pass through their applicable border crossing so long as they stay within the boundaries of the park.About Peace Arch Park

==History==

The Peace Arch park has been the site of various international events and protests.  In 1952, African-American singer and activist Paul Robeson, banned from international travel during the Red Scares, performed several concerts at the site. He sang from a flatbed truck on the American side to an audience in Canada.
One book extensively covers the history of the International Peace Arch. It bears the title, Sam Hill's Peace Arch: Remembrance of Dreams Past by Richard Clark (2005).
On 9 February 2010, the Vancouver 2010 Olympic Torch Relay visited the Peace Arch.

==Gallery==

Image:Peacearch-insideinscription1.jpg
Image:Peacearch-insideinscription2.jpg
Image:Peacearch-boundaryplaque.jpg
File:Peace Arch.JPG

==See also==

==Notes==

==External links==


