[[Typed lambda calculus]]

CATEGORIES: Lambda calculus, Logic in computer science, Theory of computation, Type theory

Typed lambda calculi are foundational programming languages and are the base of typed functional programming languages such as ML and Haskell and, more indirectly, typed imperative programming languages. Typed lambda calculi play an important role in the design of type systems for programming languages; here typability usually captures desirable properties of the program, e.g. the program will not cause a memory access violation.
Typed lambda calculi are closely related to mathematical logic and proof theory via the Curry–Howard isomorphism and they can be considered as the internal language of classes of categories, e.g. the simply typed lambda calculus is the language of Cartesian closed categories (CCCs).

==Kinds of typed lambda calculi==

All the systems mentioned so far, with the exception of the untyped lambda calculus, are strongly normalizing: all computations terminate. As a consequence they are consistent as a logic, i.e. there are uninhabited types. There exist, however, typed lambda calculi that are not strongly normalizing. For example the dependently typed lambda calculus with a type of all types (Type : Type) is not normalizing due to Girard's paradox. This system is also the simplest pure type system, a formalism which generalizes the Lambda cube. Systems with explicit recursion combinators, such as Plotkin's PCF, are not normalizing, but they are not intended to be interpreted as a logic. Indeed, PCF (for Programming language for Computable Functions) is a prototypical, typed functional programming language, where types are used to ensure that programs are well-behaved but not necessarily terminating.

==Applications to programming languages==

In computer programming, the routines (functions, procedures, methods) of strongly typed programming languages closely correspond to typed lambda expressions. Eiffel has a notion of "inline agent" that makes it possible to define and manipulate typed lambda expressions directly, through such expressions as agent (p: PERSON): STRING do Result := p.spouse.name end, denoting an object that represents a function which returns a person's spouse's name.

==See also==

==References==


