[[Theodore Hook]]

CATEGORIES: English writers, 1788 births, 1841 deaths, Alumni of St Mary Hall, Oxford, Mauritian civil servants

Theodore Edward Hook (22 September 1788 – 24 August 1841) was an English man of letters and composer, and briefly a civil servant in Mauritius.  He is best known for his practical jokes, particularly the Berners Street Hoax in 1810.
Hook was born in Charlotte Street, Bedford Square, London.  His father, James Hook (1746–1827), was a composer of popular songs; his elder brother, also James Hook, became Dean of Worcester.
He spent a year at Harrow School, and subsequently matriculated at the University of Oxford, but he never actually resided at the university.  His father took delight in exhibiting the boy's musical and metrical gifts, and the precocious Theodore became a pet of the green room. At the age of sixteen, in conjunction with his father, he scored a dramatic success with The Soldier's Return, a comic opera, and this he followed up with a series of popular ventures with John Liston and Charles Mathews, including Teleki.
Hook then became a playboy and practical joker, best known for the Berners Street Hoax in 1810, in which he arranged for dozens of tradesmen, and notables such as the Lord Mayor of London, the Governor of the Bank of England, the Chairman of the East India Company, and the Duke of Gloucester to visit Mrs Tottenham at 54 Berners Street, to win a bet that he could transform any house in London into the most talked-about address within a week.
He took up residence at St Mary Hall, Oxford University, leaving after two terms to resume his former life. His gift of improvising songs charmed the Prince Regent into a declaration that something must be done for Hook, who was appointed accountant-general and treasurer of Mauritius with a salary of £2,000 a year.  He was the life and soul of the island from his arrival in October 1813, but a serious deficiency having been discovered in the treasury accounts in 1817, he was arrested and brought to England on a criminal charge. A sum of about £12,000 had been abstracted by a deputy official, and for this amount Hook was held responsible.
During the scrutiny of the audit board he lived obscurely and maintained himself by writing for magazines and newspapers. In 1820 he launched the newspaper John Bull, the champion of high Toryism and the virulent detractor of Queen Caroline. Witty criticism and pitiless invective secured it a large circulation, and from this source Hook derived, for the first year at least, an income of £2,000. He was, however, arrested for the second time on account of his debt to the state, which he made no effort to defray.
While he was confined in a sponging-house from 1825 to 1825, he wrote the nine volumes of stories afterwards collected under the title of Sayings and Doings (1824–1828). In the early 1820s he helped the singer Michael Kelly compile his Reminiscences, which include details of working with Mozart. In the remaining 23 years of his life he poured forth 38 volumes, besides articles, squibs and sketches. His novels have frequent passages of racy narrative and vivid portraiture. They include Maxwell (1830), a portrait of his friend the Revevent E. Cannon; Love and Pride (1833); the autobiographic Gilbert Gurney (1836) and Gurney Married (1838); Jack Brag (1837) and Peregrine Bunce (1842).  He did not finish a biographical work on Charles Mathews. His last novel was Births, Marriages and Deaths (1839).
Work had already begun to tell on his health, when Hook returned to his old habits; and a prolonged attempt to combine industry and dissipation resulted in the confession that he was done up in purse, in mind and in body too at last. He died at home in Fulham on 24 August 1841. His estate was seized by the Treasury.  He never married, but lived with Mary Anne Doughty; they had six children.
Hook is remembered as one of the most brilliant figures of Georgian times.  He inspired the characters of Lucian Gay in Benjamin Disraeli's novel Coningsby and Mr Wagg in Thackeray's Vanity Fair.  Coleridge praised him as being "as true a genius as Dante".

==References==


