[[Earl of Mount Edgcumbe]]

CATEGORIES: Earldoms in the Peerage of Great Britain, People in Cornish history

Earl of Mount Edgcumbe is a title in the Peerage of Great Britain. It was created in 1789 for George Edgcumbe, 3rd Baron Edgcumbe. The Edgcumbe family descends from Sir Piers Edgcumbe of Cotehele in Cornwall, who acquired the Mount Edgcumbe estate near Plymouth through marriage in the early 16th century. His descendant Richard Edgcumbe was a prominent politician and served as Paymaster-General of Ireland and as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. In 1742 he was created Baron Edgcumbe, of Mount Edgcumbe in the County of Devon, in the Peerage of Great Britain. He was succeeded by his eldest son, the second Baron. He represented Plympton Erle, Lostwithiel and Penrhyn in the House of Commons and served as Lord-Lieutenant of Cornwall. On his death the title passed to his younger brother, the third Baron. He was an Admiral of the Blue and also held political office as Treasurer of the Household and as Captain of the Honourable Band of Gentlemen Pensioners. In 1781 he was created Viscount Mount Edgcumbe and Valletort and in 1789 he was further honoured when he was made Earl of Mount Edgcumbe. Both titles are in the Peerage of Great Britain.
He was succeeded by his son, the second Earl. He sat as Member of Parliament for Lostwithiel and Fowey and served as Lord-Lieutenant of Cornwall. On his death the titles passed to his second but eldest surviving son, Viscount Valletort's brother, the third Earl. He also represented Lostwithiel and Fowey in the House of Commons. His son, the fourth Earl, was a Conservative politician and served as Lord Chamberlain of the Household and as Lord Steward of the Household. On his death the titles passed to his son, the fifth Earl. He held the honorary post of Deputy Lord Warden of the Stannaries from 1913 to 1944. On his death the line of the third Earl failed. The late Earl was succeeded by his second cousin, the sixth Earl. He was the grandson of the Hon. George Edgcumbe, youngest son of the second Earl. He was succeeded by his first cousin once removed, the seventh Earl. He was the grandson of Edward Mortimer Edgcumbe, second son of the Hon. George Edgcumbe, youngest son of the second Earl. [tpl]As of|2013[/tpl] the titles are held by his nephew, the eighth Earl, who succeeded in 1982. He is the eldest son of George Aubrey Valletort Edgcumbe, brother of the seventh Earl. 
The heir apparent to the earldom uses the courtesy title of Viscount Valletort.
The ancestral seat of the Edgcumbe family is Mount Edgcumbe House near Plymouth. The present family seat is Empacombe House, also near Plymouth.

==Barons Edgcumbe (1742)==

==Earls of Mount Edgcumbe (1789)==

The heir presumptive is the present holder's half-brother Hon. Piers Valletort Edgcumbe (b. 1946). 
The heir presumptive's heir presumptive is his brother Hon. Christopher George Mortimer Edgcumbe (b. 1950). 
The heir presumptive's heir presumptive's heir apparent is his son Douglas George Valletort Edgcumbe (b. 1985).

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==


