[[National emblem of Azerbaijan]]

CATEGORIES: National symbols of Azerbaijan, National emblems

The state emblem of AzerbaijanConstitution of Azerbaijan | Article 23 mixes traditional and modern symbols. The focal point of the emblem is the fire symbol. This symbol comes from the fact that Azerbaijan has many everlasting fires which also gives the name "land of eternal fire".
At the bottom of the emblem is a stalk of wheat, representing the main agricultural product of the nation, which was also part of the earlier arms. The other plant represented at the bottom is oak.

==History==

The government of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic declared a competition on the national emblem of Azerbaijan on January 30, 1920 and made a decision to present the emblem model on May of the same year. However, due to the collapse of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic on April 28, 1920, the emblem was not approved.
The Supreme Medjlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic discussed the issue connected with the national emblem and raised petition in the Supreme Council of the Azerbaijan SSR on declaration of a new competition on the national emblem of Azerbaijan on November 17, 1990.
The competition was declared by the decision of the Supreme Council of the Azerbaijan Republic on February 5, 1991. Tens of projects of the emblem were presented during the competition of 1991-1992 and it was also proposed to approve one of the projects developed in 1919-1920.
By the Constitutional Law of the Supreme Council of the Azerbaijan Republic, approved on January 19, 1993, one of the projects, developed in 1919-1920 with certain alterations was confirmed the national emblem of the Azerbaijan Republic.

==Meaning==

The colors used in composing the emblem are taken from the national flag. The green represents that Azerbaijan is an Islamic country. Red represents the development and democracy of Azerbaijan. The blue represents that the Azerbaijanis are one of the Turkic peoples. The star itself stands for the eight branches of the Turkic peoples, and between each point of the star, there is a smaller eight pointed star found.
The National Emblem of the Azerbaijan Republic symbolizes the independence of Azerbaijan. The national emblem is the image of an oriental shield and a semicircle formed by the branches of an oak-tree and ears resting on it. The shield contains the image of a fire in the center of an eight-point star against a background of the colors of the National flag of Azerbaijan.

==Usage==

The Azerbaijani emblem is shown on:

==See also==

==References==


