[[John Crichton-Stuart, 3rd Marquess of Bute]]

CATEGORIES: 1847 births, 1900 deaths, People from the Isle of Bute, Anglo-Scots, Lord-Lieutenants of Buteshire, Marquesses of Bute, People educated at Harrow School, Alumni of Christ Church, Oxford, Knights of the Thistle, Knights of St. Gregory the Great, Rectors of the University of St Andrews, History of Cardiff, Scottish Roman Catholics, Converts to Roman Catholicism

John Patrick Crichton-Stuart, 3rd Marquess of Bute KT, KSG, KGCHSConverts to Rome by Gordon Gorman 1885 (12 September 1847 – 9 October 1900) was a landed aristocrat, industrial magnate, antiquarian, scholar, philanthropist and architectural patron.
He was a Knight Grand Cross of the Holy Sepulchre, Knight of the Order of St.
Gregory the Great and Hereditary Keeper of Rothesay Castle.

==Early life==

The 3rd Marquess was born at the family seat of Mount Stuart, on the Isle of Bute in Scotland, to John Crichton-Stuart, 2nd Marquess of Bute and Sophia Rawdon-Hastings (daughter of Francis Rawdon-Hastings, 1st Marquess of Hastings). The Crichton-Stuarts were illegitimate offspring of the Scottish royal House of Stuart, ennobled in the 17th century. The foundations of the family's fortunes were laid by John Stuart, 3rd Earl of Bute, Prime Minister to George III, who married an heiress, Mary Wortley-Montagu, and attained great political prominence, although this was not accompanied by great political success. His son, John Stuart, 1st Marquess of Bute, out-stripped his father by marrying two heiresses, Charlotte Hickman, daughter of the 2nd Viscount Windsor, and Frances Coutts, of the Coutts banking dynasty. By his first marriage, the Marquess fathered John Crichton-Stuart, 2nd Marquess of Bute, the founder of modern Cardiff and father of the 3rd Marquess. The 2nd Marquess was a far-sighted early industrialist and began, at great financial risk, the development of Cardiff as a port to export the mineral wealth of the South Wales Valleys. Accumulating great debts and mortgages on his, admittedly, vast estates, the Marquess rightly foresaw the potential of Cardiff, telling his concerned solicitor in 1844, "I am willing to think well of my income in the distance."  The following fifty years saw his faith triumphantly vindicated but the ensuing riches were to be enjoyed, and spent, by his son, rather than himself.
The 2nd Marquess died in 1848 and John Patrick Crichton-Stuart acceded to the Marquessate at less than six months old. He was educated at Harrow School and Christ Church, Oxford.  Bute had been attracted to the Roman Catholic Church since childhood,and the efforts of his guardians to weaken this attraction only added to it. He was never a member of the Church of England, despite efforts by Henry Parry Liddon to attract him to it.R. Hannah (2012) The Grand Designer: third Marquess of Bute. Bute's letters to one of his very few intimate friends during his Oxford career show with what conscientious care he worked out the religious question for himself. On 8 December 1868, he was received into the Church by Monsignor Capel at a convent in Southwark, and a little later was confirmed by Pius IX, in Rome: there was a public scandal.  His conversion was the inspiration for Benjamin Disraeli's novel, Lothair.
Bute's eclectic early education gave him a lifelong interest in architecture,and his father's accumulated wealth was to give him the means to indulge this interest on a stupendous scale. He came to love scholarly research, and wrote on the Celtic and mediaeval periods.R Hannah (2012) The Grand Designer: third Marquess of Bute But it would be entirely wrong to view the 3rd Marquess as a dilettante; his interests were serious, scholarly and profound.

==Interests==

The Marquess's vast range of interests; religion, medievalism, the occult, architecture, travelling, linguistics, philanthropy; filled his relatively short life. A prolific writer, bibliophile and traveller, as well as, somewhat reluctantly, a businessman, his energies were on a monumentally Victorian scale. But at a distance, just over one hundred years from his death, it is his architectural patronage that creates his lasting memorial.
In 1865, the Marquess met William Burges and the two embarked on an architectural partnership, the results of which long outlasted Burges' own death in 1881. Bute's desires and money, allied with Burges' fantastical imagination and skill led to the creation of two of the finest creations of the late Victorian era Gothic Revival, Cardiff Castle and Castell Coch. The two buildings represent both the potential of colossal industrial wealth and the desire to escape the scene of that wealth's creation. The theme recurs again and again in the huge outpouring of Bute's patronage, in chapels, castle, abbeys, universities and palaces. Bute's later buildings are hardly less remarkable than his collaborations with Burges. R R Anderson built Mount Stuart House for him, and Bute worked in collaborative with many of Burges's colleagues including William Frame and H W Lonsdale on the interiors.  John Kinross was Bute's architect for the sympathetic and creative reworking of the partially ruined Falkland Palace. Kinross also restored Greyfriars in Elgin for Bute.R Hannah (2012) The Grand Designer: third Marquess of Bute.

==Patronage==

The Marquess's patronage was extensive, with a particular enthusiasm for buildings of religion and academia. Whilst Rector of the University of St Andrews, he provided the University with a new home for its Medical School and endowed the Bute Chair of Medicine.  A supporter of education for women, he also paid for a St Andrews University's first female lecturer, who taught anatomy to women medical students when Professor James Bell Pettigrew refused to do so.  At the University of Glasgow, he gifted the funds required to complete the University's huge central hall, named the Bute Hall in his honour, and he is commemorated both at the University's Commemoration Day and on its Memorial Gates. He was made the Honorary President ('Ceannard Urramach a' Chomainn') to the Highland Society of the University of Edinburgh.
Between 1868 and 1886 he financed the rebuilding of St Margaret's Parish Church, Roath, Cardiff, creating a new mausoleum for the Bute family with sarcophagi in red marble.Lynn F. Pearson, Mausoleums, Shire Publications Ltd. (2002), page 39. ISBN 0 7478 0518 0

==The Marquess of Bute's Case==

The Marquess was involved in a notable company law case, known as "the Marquess of Bute's Case", reported on appeal in 1892, called Re Cardiff Savings Bank 1892 2 Ch 100. The Marquess had been appointed to the board of directors of the Cardiff Savings Bank as "President", at the age of six months, in effect inheriting the office from his father.  He only attended one board meeting in the next 38 years.  When the bank went insolvent following a fellow director's fraudulent dealing, Stirling J held that the Marquess was not liable as he knew nothing of what was going on.  It was not suggested that he ought to have known what was going on, and had a duty of care to inform himself as to the affairs of the bank.  The case set a famous legal precedent, now superseded, for the minimal view of the duties of company directors.  It was naturally a considerable embarrassment for the Marquess, despite escaping legal blame.

==Family life==

John Patrick Crichton-Stuart married Gwendolen Fitzalan-Howard (daughter of Edward Fitzalan-Howard, 1st Baron Howard of Glossop) in 1872 and had four children:

==Works==

|title=Brendan's Fabulous Voyage
|author= John Patrick Crichton-Stuart Bute, Third Marquess of Bute
|year=1911
|publisher=
|isbn=
|url=http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/17343
}} via Project Gutenberg
|title=The Roman breviary(1908)
|author= The Roman Catholic Church; John Patrick Crichton-Stuart Bute, Third Marquess of Bute (transl)
|year= 1908
|edition=New Rev
|origyear=1st pub in 1879
|publisher=William Blackwood and Sons
|location=Edinburgh and London
|isbn=
|url=http://archive.org/details/theromanbreviary01unknuoft
}} via The Internet Archive

==Death==

Bute died in 1900 after a protracted illness, his first stroke having occurred in 1896, and was buried in a small chapel on the Isle of Bute, his ancestral home.  His heart was buried on the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem.

==References==

==External links==


