[[Minstrel in the Gallery]]

CATEGORIES: Jethro Tull albums, 1975 albums, Chrysalis Records albums, Island Records albums, Capitol Records albums, Albums produced by Ian Anderson

Minstrel in the Gallery is the eighth studio album by British band Jethro Tull, released in September 1975.
Ian Anderson's lyrics and subject matter show an introspective and cynical air, possibly the byproduct of Anderson's recent divorce from first wife Jennie Franks and the pressures of touring, coupled with the frustrations of writing for and recording the album in Monte Carlo. The title refers to the use of a minstrel's gallery in the great hall of castles or manor houses.
Stylistically the album is varied. The songs "Minstrel in the Gallery" and "Black Satin Dancer" are hard-rock, although "Minstrel", like another track, "Cold Wind to Valhalla", starts with several acoustic verses that are basically identical in structure to the main, hard rock section of the song, then break into the heavier version after an instrumental break.
Five of the seven songs on the album feature intros, consisting of either speech or count-offs (the exceptions being "Black Satin Dancer" and "Grace").
This album was remastered with five additional bonus tracks in November 2002, including incomplete live-in-the-studio renditions of "Minstrel in the Gallery" and "Cold Wind to Valhalla", some tracks that appeared only on maxi-singles ("Pan Dance", "March the Mad Scientist") and "Summerday Sands", which was the B-side of the "Minstrel in the Gallery" single.

==Production==

Ian Anderson, remembering the recording of the album stated that: "'Minstrel' is one of two albums that were made during the year we recorded abroad avoid the U.K.'s exorbitant tax rate on performing artists. Both Minstrel and its follow up, Too Old to Rock and Roll, were made in Monte Carlo and in the same year, although they were released in different years."http://www.tullpress.com/gwsept99.htm
The band had decamped to a studio in Monte Carlo (Jeffrey Hammond-Hammond, the bassist, having ridden there from England on a motorbike which he managed to spectacularly crash on the way) which is pictured on the back of the album sleeve with the five minstrels standing in its gallery. The sizeof the studio also made it ideal for impromptu games of badminton, while the local beach provided its own temptations. 
Not only, Anderson felt that such distractions and other personal problems within the band meant that it was not functioning as well as a unit as it had on previous albumshttp://jethrotull.com/minstrel-in-the-gallery/, he also said that: "Minstrel is actually a reflective album, because lot of the music on it was written at a time when I was looking back with some nostalgia on my life in the U.K. I'd always lived there and suddenly I was out for a year. So a lot o the songs — like 'Baker Street Muse' and the title track — are reflective of London city life The music also reflects my life as a musician since at that time I was not in a permanent relationship and living out of a suitcase, hotel rooms and rented apartments."http://www.tullpress.com/gwsept99.htm

==Musical Style==

The upside of that was that the album contained a liberal sprinkling of the type of personal acoustic ditties which had graced the “Aqualung” album, with the string-adorned “Requiem” being possibly the most romantic song Ian has ever written, and the closing “Grace” – more whimsical in its romanticism – clocking in at a whole thirty seven seconds. And after the forty-plus minute “Thick As A Brick” and “A Passion Play” epics, Ian once again dabbled with an extended suite of music with “Baker Street Muse”, a seventeen minute four-part observation of the seedier side of his then home town of London.
The acoustic guitar and strings are to the fore in most of the other songs, but the likes of “Cold Wind To Valhalla” and “Black Satin Dancer” then explode into full-blown rockers, with Martin Barre’s electric guitar taking the spotlight as the band thunders along behind him in an adventurous exploration of unpredictable key-changes and time-signatures. That juxtaposition of acoustic and electric has been a feature of Jethro Tull’s music throughout their career, but is perhaps never better exemplified than on “Minstrel In The Gallery” which, after earlier albums’ tags of ‘blues’ and ‘prog’, is unequivocally a ‘rock’ album, albeit with a maturity and sophistication both lyrically and harmonically which highlighted Tull’s originality.

==Themes==

The concept of the album goes around the persective of a Minstrel looking to his audience. Not only this brings several Medieval colors to the musical style, it also contributes to the lyrics, written in a introspective and individual perspective, towards the past, the audience, and the critics. Ian Anderson' court jester made his appearence prominently in the album.
Though “Minstrel” is heavily acoustic, songs from the disc rarely appear in concert set lists in recent years. Partly, this could very well be due to “Minstrel’s” rather dark, often very personal subject matter and tone for many of the acoustical tunes. Ian was just coming off a divorce and “One White Duck/0¹º = Nothing At All” addresses the end of his marriage. “One White Duck” is related to a common British concept (and even wall ornament) that a married couple have their “ducks in a row.” A sole duck, hence, represents separation.http://jethrotull.com/minstrel-in-the-gallery/

==Critical Reception==

The album received bad review by Rolling Stone, in which: "In keeping with the times, Tull does get points for technical competence. Still, despite the diligence with which these gents execute the often clichéd arrangements, the most soulful moment on the album is a line from 'Baker St. Muse', sung in passing by Anderson as he leaves the studio. Finding the door locked, he screams: "I can't get out!" That's roughly the same feeling that this listener got about midway through side one."http://www.tullpress.com/rs6nov75.htm

==Track listing==

==Personnel==

==Charts==

==Notes==

==External links==


