[[Good Morning, Miami]]

CATEGORIES: 2000s American television series, 2002 American television series debuts, 2004 American television series endings, American television sitcoms, English-language television programming, NBC network shows, Television series about television, Television shows set in Miami, Florida

Good Morning, Miami is a sitcom which ran from 2002 to 2004 on NBC. Created by David Kohan and Max Mutchnick, the show focused on the personal and professional life of Jake, the executive producer of the lowest-rated morning show in the country, based in Miami. 
Though unsuccessful and unacclaimed, the show lasted in the coveted Thursday "Must See TV" lineup for an entire season.
After nine episodes were aired during the second season in the United States, the show was canceled and didn't get to finish airing the rest of the 18 episodes that were ordered for the season.  However, all episodes of the second season were shown on TG4 in Ireland.
The theme song, entitled "Once in a Lifetime", is played by John Rzeznik of the Goo Goo Dolls .

==Synopsis==

Jake decides to accept the risky job when he first sets eyes on the show's beautiful, down-to-earth hairdresser, Dylan, who wows him after he comes to visit his fun, potty-mouthed Grandma, Claire, who presents a romantic challenge like nobody before. The carnival of clowns at the station includes pompous host Gavin; Jake's wise-cracking assistant, Penny; and highly insecure station manager, Frank. After a while, Jake's ambition changed as he and Penny had a brief relationship.
Early in the first season, Gavin's morning co-host was Lucia, and Sister Brenda was the station's weather-nun.  They were written out early in the series as the producers were still searching for the "center" of their program. 
During the second season, Jake and Dylan began their relationship, almost even deciding on a relocation to New York together. Victoria Hill, a new station boss, took over the show to get higher ratings, and Gavin struggled to warm up to her. A new weather girl, Joni, was also introduced.
For the second season, exterior footage of NBC affiliate WPTV-TV's studio complex in West Palm Beach, Florida was used to portray the exteriors of the fictional Good Morning, Miami studios.
Although only some of the second season was shown in the USA, it was fully shown on TG4 in Ireland several times in a daily morning time slot. The series ended with Jake and Dylan considering to go their separate ways (though they may reunite), Gavin and Penny deciding to start a relationship and Frank marrying Gavin's mother.

==Cast and characters==

The show contained numerous references to Feuerstein's earlier work. In one scene, he scolds Gavin in front of the audience and Penny remarks, "That's one fired-up little yuppie!" (a reference to his role on the short-lived sitcom Fired Up); in a second, he drinks hard liquor and his voice gets hoarse (he did the same thing after eating food that was too spicy in Woman on Top).  In another scene, he remarks that the highlights in his hair are natural (which he also did in What Women Want).

==Episode list==

Season One
Season Two
The show aired its final episode in the U.S. on Thursday, December 18, 2003.

==External links==


