[[Richard II, Duke of Normandy]]

CATEGORIES: 1026 deaths, Dukes of Normandy, 10th-century rulers in Europe, 11th-century rulers in Europe, Year of birth uncertain, House of Normandy

Richard II (978/83 -1026), called the Good (French: Le Bon), was the eldest son and heir of Richard I the Fearless and Gunnora.Detlev Schwennicke, Europäische Stammtafeln: Stammtafeln zur Geschichte der Europäischen Staaten, Neue Folge, Band II (Marburg, Germany: J. A. Stargardt, 1984), Tafel 79The Normans in Europe, ed. & trans. Elisabeth van Houts (Manchester University Press, 2000), pp. 56-7 He was a Norman nobleman of the House of Normandy.

==Life==

Richard succeeded his father as Duke of Normandy in 996. During his minority, the first five years of his reign, his regent was Count Ralph of Ivrea, his uncle, who wielded the power and put down a peasant insurrection at the beginning of Richard's reign.François Neveux, A Brief History of The Normans (Constable and Robinson, 2008) p. 74
Richard had deep religious interests and found he had much in common with Robert II of France, who he helped militarily against the duchy of Burgundy. He forged a marriage alliance with Brittany by marrying his sister Hawise to Geoffrey I, Duke of Brittany  and by his own marriage to Geoffrey's sister, Judith of Brittany.
In 1000-1001, Richard repelled an English attack on the Cotentin Peninsula that was led by Ethelred II of England.François Neveux, A Brief History of The Normans (Constable and Robinson, 2008) pp. 94-5 Ethelred had given orders that Richard be captured, bound and brought to England.Eleanor Searle, Predatory Kinship and the Creation of Norman Power, 840-1066 (University of California Press, Berkeley, 1988), p. 132 But the English had not been prepared for the rapid response of the Norman cavalry and were utterly defeated.David Crouch, The Normans: The History of a Dynasty (Hambledon Continuum, 2007), p. 34 
Richard attempted to improve relations with England through his sister Emma of Normandy's marriage to King Ethelred. This marriage was significant in that it  later gave his grandson, William the Conqueror, the basis of his claim to the throne of England.David C. Douglas, William the Conqueror (University of California Press,1964), p. 160 This proved to be beneficial to Ethelred when in 1013 Sweyn Forkbeard invaded England. Emma with her two sons Edward and Alfred fled to Normandy followed shortly thereafter by her husband king Ethelred. Soon after the death of Ethelred, Cnut, King of England forced Emma to marry him while Richard was forced to recognize the new regime as his sister was again Queen. Richard had contacts with Scandinavian Vikings throughout his reign. He employed Viking mercenaries and concluded a treaty with Sweyn Forkbeard who was en route to England.The Normans in Europe, ed. & trans. Elisabeth van Houts (Manchester University Press, 2000),pp. 20-21  
Richard II commissioned Dudo of Saint-Quentin his clerk and confessor to portray his ducal ancestors as morally upright Christian leaders who built Normandy despite the treachery of their overlords and neighboring principalities.David Crouch, The Normans: The History of a Dynasty (Hambledon Continuum, 2007), p. 32 It was clearly a work of propaganda designed to legitimize the Norman settlement, and while it contains numerous historically unreliable legends, as respects the reigns of his father and grandfather, Richard I and William I it is basically reliable.The Gesta Normannorum Ducum of William of Jumièges, Orderic Vitalis, and Robert of Torigni, Ed. & Trans. Elizabeth M.C. Van Houts, Vol. I (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1992), p. xx
In 1025 and 1026 Richard confirmed gifts of his great-grandfather Rollo to Saint-Ouen at Rouen.The Gesta Normannorum Ducum of William of Jumièges, Orderic Vitalis, and Robert of Torigni, Ed. & Trans. Elizabeth M.C. Van Houts, Vol. I (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1992), p. 67 n. 5 His other numerous grants to monastic houses tends to indicate the areas over which Richard had ducal control, namely Caen, the Éverecin, the Cotentin, the Pays de Caux and Rouen.Eleanor Searle, Predatory Kinship and the Creation of Norman Power, 840-1066 (University of California Press, Berkeley, 1988), p. 128
Richard II died 28 Aug 1026.

==Marriages and children==

He married firstly, c.1000, Judith (982–1017), daughter of Conan I of Brittany,Detlev Schwennicke, Europäische Stammtafeln: Stammtafeln zur Geschichte der Europäischen Staaten, Neue Folge, Band II (Marburg, Germany: J. A. Stargardt, 1984), Tafel 75David C. Douglas, William The Conqueror (University of California Press, Berkeley & Los Angeles, 1964), p. 15, n. 5 by whom he had the following issue:
Secondly he married Poppa of Envermeu, by whom he had the following issue:

==Genealogy==

==Notes==

==References==

 


