[[Murder of Megan Kanka]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 births, 1994 deaths, Kidnapped American children, Murdered American children, Mercer County, New Jersey, Deaths by person, Rapes in the United States, Deaths by strangulation in the United States, People murdered in New Jersey, 1994 in New Jersey

The murder of Megan Kanka occurred on July 29, 1994 in Hamilton Township, Mercer County, New Jersey, United States. The seven-year-old child was raped and murdered by her neighbor Jesse Timmendequas. The murder attracted national attention and subsequently led to the introduction of "Megan's Law", which requires law enforcement to disclose details relating to the location of registered sex offenders.
Kanka's family set up a charitable foundation, the Megan Nicole Kanka Foundation, with the aim of preventing crimes against children.

==Jesse Timmendequas==

Jesse K. Timmendequas (born April 15, 1961) had two previous convictions for sexually assaulting young girls. In 1979 he pleaded guilty to the attempted aggravated sexual assault of a five-year-old girl in Piscataway Township, New Jersey. He was given a suspended sentence but, after failing to go to counseling, he was sent for nine months to the Middlesex Adult Correctional Center. In 1981, Timmendequas pleaded guilty in regards to the assault of a seven-year-old girl, and was imprisoned at the Adult Diagnostic & Treatment Center (ADTC) in Avenel, New Jersey, for six years.
Timmendequas reportedly participated little in the treatment program offered at the ADTC. He was described by one therapist who treated him at the facility as a "whiner" who spent most of his time sleeping. Another therapist stated that she had believed that Timmendequas would eventually commit another sex crime (although she did not believe he would commit murder).Glaberson, William. "STRANGER ON THE BLOCK -- At Center of 'Megan's Law' Case, a Man No One Could Reach." The New York Times. Tuesday May 28, 2006. Retrieved on September 30, 2009.

==Murder and trial==

Timmendequas lured Kanka into his house by offering to show her a puppy and subsequently raped her. She was slammed onto a dresser, suffocated and strangled to death with a belt. He moved her body to his truck, assaulting her a further time before placing the body in a wooden toy chest and dumping it in nearby Mercer County Park. The next day, he confessed to investigators and led police to the site.
Evidence including bloodstains, hair, and fiber samples, as well as a bite mark matching Kanka's teeth on Timmendequas' hand, led to Timmendequas being found guilty of kidnapping, four counts of aggravated sexual assault, and two counts of felony murder—committing murder in the course of a felony.
The court sentenced Timmendequas to death, and the sentence was upheld by the New Jersey Supreme Court on appeal.Peterson, Iver. "Death Penalty Is Upheld in 'Megan' Case." The New York Times. Friday February 2, 2001. Retrieved on September 30, 2009. Congressman Dick Zimmer stated, "I believe he is exactly the kind of predator that the legislature had in mind when it enacted the death penalty.""Repeat sex offender guilty in 'Megan's Law' case." CNN. May 30, 1997. Retrieved on April 12, 2014.
Timmendequas remained on New Jersey's Death Row until December 17, 2007, when the New Jersey Legislature abolished the state's death penalty. This ban resulted in Timmendequas's sentence being commuted to life in prison without the possibility of parole.Mears, Bill. "New Jersey lawmakers vote to abolish death penalty." CNN. Thursday December 13, 2007. Retrieved on September 30, 2009."'Megan's Law' killer escapes death under N.J. execution ban." CNN. Monday December 17, 2007. Retrieved on September 30, 2009.

==Megan's Law==

One month after the murder, the New Jersey General Assembly passed a series of bills proposed by Paul Kramer that would require sex offender registration, with a database tracked by the state, community notification of registered sex offenders moving into a neighborhood and life in prison for repeat sex offenders. Paul Kramer expressed incredulity at the controversy created by the bills, saying that "Megan Kanka would be alive today" if the bills he proposed had been law.

==References==


