[[Central tendency]]

CATEGORIES: Summary statistics, Multivariate statistics, Statistical terminology

In statistics, a central tendency (or, more commonly, a measure of central tendency) is a central value or a typical value for a probability distribution.Weisberg H.F (1992) Central Tendency and Variability, Sage University Paper Series on Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences,  ISBN 0-8039-4007-6 p.2  It is occasionally called an average or just the center of the distribution. The most common measures of central tendency are the arithmetic mean, the median and the mode. A central tendency can be calculated for either a finite set of values or for a theoretical distribution, such as the normal distribution. Occasionally authors use central tendency (or centrality), to mean "the tendency of quantitative data to cluster around some central value." Dodge, Y. (2003) The Oxford Dictionary of Statistical Terms, OUP for International Statistical Institute. ISBN 0-19-920613-9 (entry for "central tendency") Upton, G.; Cook, I. (2008) Oxford Dictionary of Statistics, OUP ISBN 978-0-19-954145-4 (entry for "central tendency")  This meaning might be expected from the usual dictionary definitions of the words  tendency and centrality. Those authors may judge whether data has a strong or a weak central tendency based on the statistical dispersion, as measured by the standard deviation or something similar.
The term "central tendency" dates from the late 1920s.

==Measures of central tendency==

The following may be applied to one-dimensional data. Depending on the circumstances, it may be appropriate to transform the data before calculating a central tendency. Examples are squaring the values or taking logarithms. Whether a transformation is appropriate and what it should be depend heavily on the data being analyzed.
Any of the above may be applied to each dimension of multi-dimensional data, but the results may not be invariant to rotations of the multi-dimensional space. In addition, there is the
The Quadratic mean (often known as the root mean square) is useful in engineering, but is not often used in statistics. This is because it is not a good indicator of the center of the distribution when the distribution includes negative values.

==Solutions to variational problems==

Several measures of central tendency can be characterized as solving a variational problem, in the sense of the calculus of variations, namely minimizing variation from the center. That is, given a measure of statistical dispersion, one asks for a measure of central tendency that minimizes variation: such that variation from the center is minimal among all choices of center. In a quip, "dispersion precedes location". In the sense of Lp spaces, the correspondence is:
Thus standard deviation about the mean is lower than standard deviation about any other point, and the maximum deviation about the midrange is lower than the maximum deviation about any other point. The uniqueness of this characterization of mean follows from convex optimization.  Indeed, for a given (fixed) data set x, the function
represents the dispersion about a constant value c relative to the L2 norm.  Because the function ƒ2 is a strictly convex coercive function, the minimizer exists and is unique.
Note that the median in this sense is not in general unique, and in fact any point between the two central points of a discrete distribution minimizes average absolute deviation.  The dispersion in the L1 norm, given by
is not strictly convex, whereas strict convexity is needed to ensure uniqueness of the minimizer.  In spite of this, the minimizer is unique for the L∞ norm.

==Relationships between the mean, median and mode==

For unimodal distributions the following bounds are known and are sharp:Johnson NL, Rogers CA (1951) "The moment problem for unimodal distributions". Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 22 (3) 433–439
where μ is the mean, ν is the median, θ is the mode, and σ is the standard deviation.
For every distribution,Hotelling H, Solomons LM (1932) The limits of a measure of skewness. Annals Math Stat 3, 141–114Garver (1932) Concerning the limits of a mesuare of skewness. Ann Math Stats 3(4) 141–142 

==See also==

==References==


