[[Claude Berrou]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 births, Living people, French information theorists, Members of the French Academy of Sciences

Claude Berrou (born September 23, 1951, Penmarch) is a French professor in electrical engineering at École Nationale Supérieure des Télécommunications de Bretagne, now Telecom-Bretagne. He is the coinventor with Alain Glavieux in 1991 (and Punya Thitimajshima that developed later similar methods published in a doctorate thesis when he was a student in the same research lab) of a groundbreaking quasi-optimal error-correcting coding scheme called Turbo codes.

==Key research activities==

His current research activities are now concentrated on the application and extension of the Turbo technology in various domains, including his research on Artificial thinking, because the Turbo-decoding has been recognized as a new instance of the very general principle of Belief propagation; one application of this principle has been invented for the decoding of Low-density parity-check codes (LDPC codes also known as Gallager codes, in honor of Robert G. Gallager, who developed the LDPC concept in his doctoral dissertation at MIT in 1960 as a theoretical model whose practical implementation was not widely developed until recently). The Turbo principle is generalized now by Claude Berrou and his lab team for the processing of various functions such as the demodulation, the detection or the equalization using a network of multiple convolution codes working in parallel with probabilistic feedback.
Other subjects of interest include all their possible applications in the field of artificial intelligence, for example with a better understanding of natural biological thinking and memory for the implementation of such model using neural networks for the processing of pulsed signals with software and hardware methods with auto-selected and self-maintained combinations of activation cycles of adjacent neurons.La pensée artificielle (The Artificial Thinking), research project paper by Claude Berrou, ENST Bretagne (2008).

==Publications==

He is the author or coauthor of several books related to turbocodes and their encoding/decoding methods or implementation devices:
He wrote many chapters in various books related to turbocodes in US publications, published several articles in various international research magazines with scientific review comities, and made many communications in international conferences with review comities.
During his work on turbocodes and parallel convolutive encoding and decoding, he has authored several registered patents for methods and devices implementing this technology:

==Distinctions==

He has received several distinctions:See Claude Berrou's personal biography page on the ENST Bretagne web site (external link below).
He was nominated for the European Inventor of the Year Award (2006).
He was finally elected a member of the French Academy of Sciences in 2007.

==See also==

==Notes==

==External links==


