[[The Crows]]

CATEGORIES: Doo-wop groups, Musical groups established in 1951, Musical groups disestablished in 1955

The Crows were an American R & B singing group who achieved commercial success in the 1950s.  The group's first single and only major hit, "Gee", released in June 1953, has been credited with being the first Rock n’ Roll hit by a rock and roll group.Warner, Jay, American Singing Groups: A History from 1940s to Today (2006), published by Hal Leonard Corporation, at page 137 It peaked at position #14 and #2, respectively, on the Billboard magazine pop and rhythm-and-blues charts in 1954.

==History==

When The Crows started out in 1951, practicing sidewalk harmonies, the original members were Daniel "Sonny" Norton (lead), William "Bill" Davis (baritone), Harold Major (tenor), Jerry Wittick (tenor), and Gerald Hamilton (bass).  In 1952, Wittick left the group and was replaced by Mark Jackson (tenor and guitarist). 
They were discovered at Apollo Theater's Wednesday night talent show by talent agent Cliff Martinez and brought to independent producer George Goldner who had just set up the tiny new Rama Records label.  
The Crows were the first group signed and the first to record. The first songs they recorded were as backup to singer Viola Watkins. The song "Gee" was the third song recorded during their first recording session, on February 10, 1953.  It was put together in a few minutes by group member William Davis, with Watkins also being credited as cowriter.
The song was first released as the B-side of a ballad, "I Love You So".  However, radio stations began turning it over and playing "Gee," first in Philadelphia and later in New York and Los Angeles.  By January 1954 it had sold 100,000 copies, and by April it entered the national R&B and pop charts, rising to #2 R&B and #14 pop.  The song was a huge hit a year after it was recorded.  
The Crows were a one-hit wonder.  While "Gee" was on the charts, the record company released a number of other singles by the group, including "Heartbreaker," "Baby," and "Miss You," but none were successful. Their failures and the inability to perform regularly to support their recordings led to the breakup of the group a few months after "Gee" dropped off the Hit Parade.J. C. Marion, DooWop Nation issue #7  They maintained the original line up for the entire career of the group, with no hope for a reunion following the deaths of Gerald Hamilton in the 1960s and Daniel Norton in 1972.Warner, Jay, American Singing Groups: A History from 1940s to Today (2006), published by Hal Leonard Corporation, at page 139

==References==

==External links==


