[[Chuck Austen]]

CATEGORIES: American graphic novelists, Military brats, Living people, Year of birth missing (living people), American comics writers

Chuck Austen (born Chuck Beckum) is an American comic book writer and artist, TV writer and animator. In the comics industry, he is known for his work on War Machine, Elektra, Action Comics, and the X-Men franchise, and in television, he is known for co-creating the animated TV series Tripping the Rift.

==Early life==

Chuck Austen was born Chuck Beckum.Chuck Austen (USA). Kees Kousemaker's Lambiek Comiclopedia. Retrieved November 14, 2011. He grew up a military brat, and after his parents divorced, he was raised by his single mother in a housing project, an upbringing that he described as a struggle.Singh, Arune (February 14, 2006). "In Depth With Chuck Austen (Part One)". Comic Book Resources.

==Career==

Austen’s early commercial work began in the 1980s, when he briefly illustrated Alan Moore's superhero series Miracleman, under his birth name "Chuck Beckum", which he later abandoned out of a desire to disassociate from his father's family name. About the same time Austen wrote and drew the semi-autobiographical black-and-white pornographic comic book series Strips, as well as Hardball. In the late 1980s, Austen drew the first five issues for the short-lived series Hero Sandwich for by Slave Labor Graphics. He also was involved in the lesser-known Dr. Radium and Lee Flea series, and slowly crossed over into DC Comics when he was assigned to Phantom Lady and Green Flame and drew Disney's The Little Mermaid limited series.

===2000s work===

From 2001 on, Austen wrote several issues of War Machine.Giles, Keith. "Austen in the Machine: Chuck Austen Interview". Comic Book Resources. September 6, 2011 The mini-series was received well, but sales of the action-driven story were plagued by the fact that the series was published in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001 attacks. In 2003, Austen followed up with War Machine 2.0. Using the creative liberties in the alternate universe in which the series is set, he wrote Rhodes' boss Tony Stark as more pacifist and business-minded than his mainstream counterpart, and Rhodes himself as the proactive protector.Singh, Arune. "MAX Muscle: Austen talks 'War Machine 2.0' & 'The Eternal' & 'World Watch'". Comic Book Resources. March 21, 2003
In the early 2000s, Austen started working regularly for Marvel Comics, writing and illustrating U.S. War Machine, illustrating Elektra, and writing a number of series, including Uncanny X-Men, Captain America, and The Avengers. His two-year run on Uncanny X-Men was his most lengthy writing assignment to date.
In 2002 Austen took part in writing a Marvel book with Bruce Jones titled The Call of Duty 911a short-lived Marvel Comics series featuring firefighters and emergency service workers dealing with paranormal phenomena in the Marvel Universe, conceived in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks as a way to convey the heroism of New York City firemen as real life superheroes. Austen wrote Call of Duty: The Brotherhood #1–6, and Call of Duty: The Wagon #1–4, and a short run on an ongoing series in 2002–2003 that lasted four issues.
From August 2003 to January 2004, Austen wrote six issues of The Eternal for the Marvel MAX line.Chuck Austen - The Eternal (2003) - Writer It was a reimagination of the classic Eternals comic book by Jack Kirby and was lauded by at least one fan as "haunting yet humorous".Comic Review - “The Eternal #1″, bureau42.comMoser, Bob. "The Eternal #6 Review". Comics Bulletin.

====X-Men and Avengers work====

In 2002, Austen took over Uncanny X-Men beginning with #410 and remained on the title until #442. His controversial run"'Graphic' Novels: 10 Shocking Superhero Hookups". Newsarama. accessed October 3, 2011. saw the return of HavokUncanny X-Men #414 and PolarisUncanny X-Men #417 to the X-Men team, the introduction of school nurse Annie GhazikhanianUncanny X-Men #412 and the addition of several existing characters to the X-Men team, including Northstar,Uncanny X-Men #415 Juggernaut,Uncanny X-Men #412. M,Uncanny X-Men #410 and Husk,Uncanny X-Men #416 as well as the revelation of the identity of Nightcrawler's father: an immortal mutant known as Azazel.Uncanny X-Men #427
Austen moved to X-Men Volume 2 in 2004; he wrote X-Men #155-163 before leaving the book. During this run, he introduced a new version of Xorn,X-Men #157 showcased the fallout from Cyclops and Emma Frost beginning a relationship following the death of Jean Grey,X-Men #155-156 as well as introduce a new version of the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants.X-Men #160-163 Michael Aronson of Comics Bulletin, while praising Austen's characterization of Professor X and Annie Ghazikhanian, excoriated Austen for what Aronson saw as his obsession with relationships and sex, and the sexist nature of his characterization of Husk.Aronson, Michael. "Uncanny X-Men v1: Hope". Comics Bulletin. November 15, 2006 According to Thor K. Jensen of Ugo Entertainment, fans disliked the romantic pairing of Angel and Husk, and cites that storyline as emblematic of critical reception to Austen's run on X-Men.Jensen, K. Thor. "The Dirtiest Comic Book Sex Scenes". UGO Entertainment. November 11, 2010
In 2004, Austen also wrote Avengers from #77-84. His first arc introduced a new Captain Britain (since renamed Lionheart), a single mother thrust into the realm of super-heroes after being killed as an innocent bystander during a fight between the Avengers and the Wrecking Crew, only to be resurrected by the original Captain Britain.Avengers #78 The second arc, which saw Austen writing former Avengers U.S. Agent and Namor, the Sub-Mariner attempting to liberate a middle eastern country from its corrupt leadership, served as launching pad for the short-lived 2004 Invaders series.Avengers V3 #83-85/Invaders #0MacPherson, Don. "AVENGERS #79: Lionheart of Avalon, Part 3", The 4th Rail. Retrieved November 14, 2011.

===Other work===

In 2004 Austen created the independent title WorldWatch, which he described as being like Warren Ellis's The Authority, but with more explicit depiction of sex, violence and realpolitik.[tpl]dead link|date=November 2011[/tpl]"WATCHING AUSTEN'S WORLD". Newsarama.[tpl]dead link|date=November 2011[/tpl] The last page of Worldwatch #2 featured an announcement from the publisher stating that Austen had been fired, and that he would be replaced by notable writer Sam Clemens (the real name of American writer Mark Twain). However, as creator and owner, Austen cannot be fired from Worldwatch. In a subsequent interview, Austen stated that it was intended as a joke, and that he was disappointed that most readers had not understood it.
From 2004 to 2005, Austen wrote issues 812–823 of DC Comics' flagship title Action Comics, starring Superman. Austen was criticized by fans for resurrecting the "Silver Age" feud between Superman supporting characters Lois Lane and Lana Lang over Superman, with Lana in particular divorcing longtime husband Pete Ross in the process. Austen controversially left the titleBenjamin Ong Pang Kean. "Whatever Happened to Austen's Boys of Summer?" Newsarama. July 10, 2008 after 10 issues. The next two were written by J.D. Finn. Austen himself speculated that J.D. Finn was actually then–Action Comics editor Eddie Berganza, and has denied using the pseudonym.
In 2006, Austen wrote Boys of Summer, an Original English Language (OEL), adult-themed manga illustrated by Hiroki Otsuka through TokyoPop. Copies of the first volume were pulled from a number of bookstores in May that year due to its graphic content. Publishers Weekly named The Boys of Summer of the Top Ten manga/manhwa of 2006, calling it both "a titillating and edgy reading experience."Kai-Ming Cha. "Top Ten Manga and Manhwa for 2006" Publishers Weekly December 19, 2006 Subsequently, news reports indicated that the series had been cancelled even though the other two volumes were written and drawn, and both Austen and Otsuka had been paid. The first volume is available in English on Amazon.com,The Boys of Summer Volume 1 at Amazon.com and Austen stated that all three would likely see print in other languages, if not in English. He also stated that doing the series was such maturing experience for him as a creator that he would never go back to superheroes or work-for-hire again. A 600-page hardcover edition collecting all three volumes, The Boys of Summer: The Complete Season, was scheduled for August 2008, but Austen reported it cancelled in a July 2008 interview.
Austen has written for animated television, most notably on the program Tripping the Rift, which he co-created.

==Reception==

During his Marvel/DC stint, Austen invented the expression "Seven Deadly Trolls". In Austen's point of view, they are a small and not representative group, who use internet message boards, blogs and newsgroups to attack Austen on a professional and personal level.Markisan Naso and Tim O'Shea. "Chuck Austen: Lionheart". Comics Bulletin. accessed October 3, 2011. Multiple comic book critics though, have panned Austen's Marvel and DC work.MacPherson, Don. "AVENGERS #77" The 4th Rail. accessed October 3, 2011.Cornwell, Jason. "Uncanny X-men #424". Comics Bulletin. June 11, 2003 Austen admitted that he took online criticism of his work personally. On a professional level, the criticism also led to hostility between himself and certain comic book store owners.
In a 2006 interview, Austen commented sarcastically on his bad image among comic book fans, later acknowledging having had a "bad day" during that interview, and being overtly cynical.

==Techniques and influences==

On a professional level, Austen admires fellow comic book creators Brian Michael Bendis, Paul Jenkins, Bill Sienkiewicz, J. Michael Straczynski, Ron Garney, Bret Blevins, JH Williams III, Al Williamson, John Romita, Rumiko Takahashi, Otomo Katsuhiro and Mitsuru Adachi.
Austen creates his art digitally. He mostly uses Macs but also uses PCs. Austen uses a variety of programs to create his art including Ray Dream Studio and 3D Studio Max in order to compose scenes which he then finishes in Photoshop.

==Personal life==

Austen is married and has two daughters. 
Austen identifies himself as humanitarian and anti-racist. In Austen's view the Republican Party discriminates against women, and he especially disliked the Bush administration.

==References==

==External links==


