[[Lady Lever Art Gallery]]

CATEGORIES: 1922 establishments in England, Buildings and structures in Wirral (borough), National Museums Liverpool, Art museums and galleries in Merseyside, Biographical museums in Merseyside, Grade II listed buildings in Merseyside, Decorative arts museums in England, Museums in Merseyside, Art museums established in 1922

The Lady Lever Art Gallery was opened in 1922 by Princess Beatrice who was the youngest daughter of Queen Victoria; the museum was founded and built by Edwarian philanthropist the Lord Leverhulme. The museum is the best surviving example of late Victorian and Edwarian taste and is still the only major public urban gallery built by its founder to house the collection that the owner had assembled for it. The Lady Lever Art Gallery is set in the picture like village of Port Sunlight. Visitors inside will discover the most beautiful collections of fine and decorative art in the UK, along with many of the world famous Pre-Raphaelite artworks and beautiful Chinese ceramics and Wedgwood jasperware. The collections are an expression of Lord Leverhulme’s personal and favorite taste. He also mainly bought pictures which in his opinion would attract the housewives who were his main customers. He began collecting art in the late 19th century to use as advertising for the popular Sunlight Soap brand that helped to create his fortune therefore at this point he was collecting arts for business, but as he grew richer his collections began to expand, his confidence grew as well and had developed a taste for collecting. He mostly collected British art, he was also fascinated by Chinese art i.e. Chinese porcelain, Roman sculpture and Greek vases which he had chosen to collect to show the certain styles that had influenced British artists in the eighteenth and the nineteenth centuries. The Eighteenth century furniture found its way into his collection and can now be seen on display along with everything else. The Gallery is famous for its Pre-Raphaelite paintings by Millais, Rossetti and Burne-Jones and holds works by Leighton, Turner, Constable, Gainsborough and Reynolds.  
Details about the gift shop and what is provided along with the museum: 
When you go to visit the lady lever museum,  there are activity rooms for visitors who are coming with families and children, where the younger children can create their own works of art inspired by the Lady Lever collection, children can also play dress up with costumes that are provided from the museum, children can also read and be creative. Also a visit to Lady Lever would not be complete without enjoying the café and shop. They are both Victorian themed with a wide range of numerous nostalgic gifts, books and jewelry. The café serves a delicious menu of many different main courses, light refreshments and of course afternoon tea. Free Wifi is also available in the café at all times. Onsite parking is available and Bebington train station is a 10 minute walk away. Finally the entry is free of charge.
Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight Village, Wirral
Open Mon-Sat 10am-5pm, Sun 12-5pm
Information desk 0151 478 4136
Exhibition and events information www.ladyleverartgallery.org.uk
The Grade II listed gallery is part of National Museums Liverpool.National Museums Liverpool

==Collection==

The collection includes:

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


