[[Late-night news]]

CATEGORIES: Local news programming in the United States

Late-night news is television news programming broadcast late at night, often focussing on local news stories.
In the United States, late-night local news is traditionally broadcast at 11:00 pm local time on stations affiliated with the Big Three television networks (CBS, NBC, and ABC) as well as those owned and operated by CTV and Global in Canada that are in the Eastern Time Zone or the Pacific Time Zone. In contrast, stations in the Central and Alaska time zones air their local news at 10:00 pm local time, with stations in other, more exotic time zones following their own schedules. The late local news is typically scheduled in-between a network's prime time programming and its late night offerings. Stations that are affiliated with Fox, The CW, MyNetworkTV, or that are independent stations tend to have newscasts at 10:00 pm (Eastern/Pacific), 9:00 pm (Central/Mountain; in these time zones, the 9:00 news is often marketed as a "prime time" newscast). 
The late local news is generally between 35 minutes (for Big Three affiliates) to 60 minutes (in Canada and on some larger non-Big Three stations in the U.S.) in length; smaller stations not affiliated with the Big Three may have newscasts fit to a 30-minute time slot. Prior to the 1960s, the typical late-night newscast lasted a mere 15 minutes; this short-form late local news is still common on local owned-and-operated stations of the CBC, which airs The National as its hourlong late-night news across Canada. Many stories on the 11 pm newscasts are follow-ups of ones airing earlier in the day, including scores from the evening's sporting events.
The stock phrase "film at 11" comes from promos run during prime time for the upcoming newscast, promising shots from a breaking story during the 11 pm newscast. However, it has gone out of the television lexicon due to technological advances in remote broadcasting have made getting film back to the station a thing of the past.
Late local news is commonplace in Canada in part due to the ease in which it can be produced to meet that country's domestic content quotas.

