[[Britain J. Williams]]

CATEGORIES: American academics, Living people, Kennesaw State University people, University of Georgia alumni, Election technology people

Britain J. Williams III is a Professor Emeritus of computer science at Kennesaw State UniversityBrit Williams Biography from the National Institute of Standards and Technology in Georgia, and is consultantKennesaw State's Center for Election Systems with the school's Center For Election Systems.  He has bachelors and masters degrees in mathematics from the University of Georgia, and a PhD is in Statistics
[ref]Transcript of testimony
before the Election Assistance Commission, June 15, 2006[/ref] from the University of Georgia in 1965.The Effect of Truncation on Tests of Hypothesis for Normal Populations, PhD Thesis, University of Georgia, 1964  He joined the faculty of (then) Kennesaw State College in 1990.Kennesaw State University 2001-02 Graduate Faculty
He was a consultant to the FEC during the development of the FEC Voting System Standards in 1990 and again in 2002. He is currently a member of the National Association of State Election Directors (NASED) Voting Systems Board and Chair of the NASED Voting Systems Board Technical Committee. He serves as a consultant to the states of Georgia, Maryland, Pennsylvania and Virginia, where he has certified electronic voting systems. In 2003, he wrote a defense of the Georgia electronic voting systemSecurity in the Georgia Voting System, Britain J. Williams, Ph.D. April 23, 2003 in response to criticism of Diebold Election Systems (now Premier Election Solutions) systems levied by Bev Harris, author of Black Box Voting.
Williams appeared at a United States Election Assistance Commission (EAC) Public Hearing on the Use, Security and Reliability of Electronic Voting Systems in Washington, DC on 5 May 2004. Other technology panelists included 
Dr. Avi Rubin, Johns Hopkins University, Information Security Institute; Stephen Berger, IEEE; and Dr. Ted Selker, MIT.
Williams is a recognized expert on electronic voting systems; he is a consultant to DES, the FEC, and four states. Williams reportedly has held a key position at the IEEE.Concerns Over

==References==

==External links==


