[[Mohawk Valley Community College]]

CATEGORIES: Two-year colleges in the United States, Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, SUNY community colleges, Educational institutions established in 1946, Universities and colleges in Oneida County, New York, Rome, New York, 1946 establishments in New York

Mohawk Valley Community College is a two-year college of the State University of New York located in Oneida County, New York in the United States. The college has campuses in Rome and Utica. 
Mohawk Valley Community College offers degrees and certificates in more than 90 areas and reported in the Spring 2011 semester that it currently had about 7,200 full- or part-time students.
Mohawk Valley Community College was the first community college established in New York State. Founded in 1946 as the New York State Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences at Utica, it was one of five post-secondary institutions established on an experimental basis after World War II. The two-year public college offered programs leading to technical and semiprofessional employment in business and industry.
In 1948, the State University of New York was created and authorized to recommend the establishment of community colleges. The College became a constituent unit of the State University in 1950. The following year, the College was authorized to grant the Associate in Applied Science degree.
In 1953, the County of Oneida assumed the sponsorship of the College, then known as Mohawk Valley Technical Institute, under the "Community College Law" section of the 1948 Education Law. This section authorized the cost of operating a community college to be shared equally through student tuition, state aid and charges to the counties of New York State.
The following year, the college began offering classes in Rome, New York, to better serve the needs of northern and western Oneida County. Classes were offered at the former Griffiss Air Force Base from 1954 to 1958 and again from 1969 to 1974. In 1974, a branch campus was established in Rome at the current location on Floyd Avenue.
As a community college, MVTI saw its enrollment and facilities grow. From 1946 to 1960, the College occupied temporary quarters in New Hartford and downtown Utica. In 1960, the College moved to new buildings on an [tpl]convert|80|acre|m2|sing=on[/tpl] site in southeast Utica. In 1963, the college change its name to Mohawk Valley Community College.
In August 2004, MVCC was given the Pepsi/NATYCAA Award.  This award recognized that MVCC was the most successful, non-scholarship athletic program for a two-year college in the nation (2003-2004.)
As of Spring 2011, the MVCC "Hawks" had an overall winning record of more than 70 percent in 22 different collegiate sports.

==Campus Life==

MVCC has five Residence Halls, Huntington, Daugherty, Butterfield, Penfield and New Hall, which is a suite style built in 2005.  Approximately 500 students live on campus. 
MVCC has a dining hall, snack bar and a new cafe called "Zest" which opened in January 2011, all operated by Sodexo. 
Beginning in the Fall of 2008, all incoming students, students who change their majors and re-matriculated students must fulfill the Diversity/Global View requirement for graduation.
Students must attend four DGV (Diversity/Global View) events throughout their college experience in order to receive credit for graduation. Events range from lectures and movies to performances, and are all free to MVCC students. 
There are more than 40 clubs on campus, among the popular are Black Student Union (BSU), International Club and Ski Club.
The MVCC Cultural Series brings musicians, comedians, magicians, theatre, movies, and more to the community. Many artists/bands have performed at MVCC such as Grammy-nominated musicians The Band Perry and Shontelle, as well as singer-songwriter Edwin McCain, comedian Brian Regan and much more.

==Expansion==

The Robert R. Jorgensen Athletic Center (named after a retired Athletics Director) was completed in Fall 2011 and provides practice space for track teams; three basketball courts; and a main floor that can support soccer, lacrosse and baseball. It also houses classrooms, a pool, and a brand new state-of-the-art fitness center with weight-bearing machines, cardio equipment, a rock-climbing wall, video game training system, and more.

==References==

3 . ^http://www.mvcc.edu/MarComm/news-releases/news/news-story/mvcc-breaks-ground-on-jorgensen-athletic-center/ "College News and Info"

==External links==


