[[David Javerbaum]]

CATEGORIES: The Onion people, American screenwriters, American humorists, American comedy writers, Living people, Jeopardy! contestants, People from Maplewood, New Jersey, Harvard University alumni, Harvard Lampoon people, Tisch School of the Arts alumni

David Javerbaum is an American comedy writer. As of 2014 he is the head writer and producer for The Maya Rudolph Show on NBC and the creator and executive producer of two news-parody shows, No, You Shut Up! and Good Morning Today, which are co-produced by The Henson Company and air on Fusion, as well as God's secretary for his Twitter account @TheTweetOfGod. 
Javerbaum was hired as a staff writer at The Daily Show with Jon Stewart in 1999. He was promoted to head writer in 2002 and became an executive producer at the end of 2006. His work for the program won 11 Emmy Awards, a Grammy Award, two Peabody Awards and Television Critics Association Awards for both Best Comedy and Best News Show. He was also one of the three principal authors of the show's textbook parody America (The Book): A Citizen's Guide to Democracy Inaction, which sold 2.6 million copies and won the 2005 Thurber Prize for American Humor. He became a consulting producer at the start of 2009 and spent the next 18 months spearheading the writing of the book's sequel, Earth (The Book): A Visitor's Guide to the Human Race, which was released in September 2010; his co-production of its audiobook earned the 2011 Grammy Award for Best Spoken-Word Album. He left the show in July 2010. 
He is the author of The Last Testament: A Memoir by God, released in 2011, in conjunction with which he created @TheTweetOfGod. It was his second book as sole author; the first was the 2009 pregnancy satire What to Expect When You're Expected: A Fetus's Guide to the First Three Trimesters.
Javerbaum is also a musical-theater lyricist and librettist who is an alumnus of the Graduate Musical Theatre Writing program at New York University's Tisch School of the Arts. He won the $100,000 Ed Kleban Award for Outstanding Lyrics in 2005. Along with his frequent collaborator Adam Schlesinger of Fountains of Wayne, he wrote the opening to the 65th Tony Awards, "Broadway: It's Not Just for Gays Anymore!", which earned him his twelfth Emmy (and first apart from The Daily Show) in 2012 for Outstanding Music and Lyrics.http://www.nytimes.com/2011/06/13/theater/theaterspecial/war-horse-is-best-play-and-mormon-has-strong-showing-in-early-tonys.html The pair also wrote the score of the Broadway adaptation of John Waters' Cry-Baby, which opened on April 24, 2008 and was nominated for a 2008 Tony Award for Best Original Score; eight original Christmas songs for Stephen Colbert's 2008 television special, A Colbert Christmas: The Greatest Gift of All!, which won a Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album; "TV Is a Vast Wonderland", the opening to the 2011 Emmy Awards; the opening ("What If Life Were More Like Theater?") and closing ("If I Had Time") songs for the 66th Tony Awards, for which he won his 13th Emmy along with a Writers Guild Award for Best Writing in a TV Special); "The Number in the Middle of the Show", for the 2013 Emmy Awards; "We're Fusion!", the 2013 'opening number' to the Fusion TV network; and "Are You Ready for Christmas?" for the 2013 Disney Christmas Parade.
Along with composer/co-librettist Robert S. Cohen, he wrote Suburb, which was nominated for Outer Critics' Circle and Drama League awards for Best Off-Broadway Musical in 2001. 
Javerbaum's other work includes serving as head writer and supervising producer for both Comedy Central's first-ever Comedy Awards and The Secret Policeman's Ball 2012, and writing three episodes for the 2011 relaunch of Beavis and Butthead. He wrote for the Late Show with David Letterman from 1998-9.
"A Quantum Theory of Mitt Romney," his humorous essay written for The New York Times, appeared in April 2012.
Javerbaum graduated from Harvard University where he wrote for the humor magazine The Harvard Lampoon and served as lyricist and co-bookwriter for two productions of the Hasty Pudding Theatricals. Later he spent three years contributing headlines to The Onion, and is credited as one of the writers for Our Dumb Century.
He was a finalist on the 1988 Jeopardy! Teen Tournament and its 1998 Teen Reunion Tournament.http://www.j-archive.com/showplayer.php?player_id=1114 Jon Stewart also called him as his phone-a-friend when Jon was on Celebrity Millionaire.
Javerbaum grew up in Maplewood, New Jersey,Meoli, Daria. "That’s Entertainment", New Jersey Monthly, October 2005. Accessed December 26. "The Daily Show With Jon Stewart is still the best fake newscast on TV, thanks to Lawrenceville native Stewart and head writer and Maplewood native David Javerbaum." where he attended Columbia High School.

==References==

==External links==


