[[Marmara University]]

CATEGORIES: Marmara University, Fatih, 1883 establishments in the Ottoman Empire, Educational institutions established in 1883

Marmara University (Turkish Marmara Üniversitesi) is a public university in the Fatih district of Istanbul, in Turkey. 
Marmara University has succeeded in becoming the second largest university in the country. The university's mission is to impart and promote knowledge and values consistent with universal standards; to meet the technological, social and cultural challenges of a global society; to contribute to the creation of an informed society, which learns about and shares this knowledge and values; and to emphasize the European dimension in the delivery of education opportunities. The rector (US:University President) of Marmara University is Prof. Dr. M. Zafer Gül who has held this position since July 2010.

==History==

===Ottoman Empire===

Marmara University  is an institution with roots extending back into the 19th century when the Hamidiye College of Higher Commercial Education was established in the Cağaloğlu district of Istanbul on January 16, 1883. At the time, it was the only leading higher education institution for studies in commerce and economics. 13 students were the first graduates in 1887. The school joined the Ministry of Education in 1889 but was abolished in 1893 to be renovated and re-opened later. It was re-opened on October 15, 1897 and has carried out its education programs ever since.

===Modern Turkey===

From 1923 to 1959, the college was called the Higher Education School of Economics and Commerce and became the Istanbul Academy of Economic and Commercial Sciences in 1959. Marmara University was formally established in 1982, when the Istanbul Academy of Economic and Commercial Sciences was consolidated with several schools of higher education offering undergraduate-level study in medicine, dentistry, law, and fine arts. To these were added faculties of arts and sciences, education, and a school of foreign languages to provide a full complement of university courses. By July 20, 1982 the university encompassed 83 faculty members including 20 professors, 31 associate professors along with 197 lecturers, assistants and 280 instructors. 
Marmara University during the 1982-1983 academic year had 9 faculties, 1 vocational school and 1 institute. Today, the university consists of 14 faculties, 9 vocational schools of higher education and 11 graduate institutes. The number of associate bachelor’s and bachelor degree programs is 136.http://www.marmara.edu.tr/tr/universitemiz/tarihce

==Education==

Marmara University with more than 3000 distinguished faculty members and a student body reaching 60.000 is on several campuses scattered throughout the cosmopolitan city of Istanbul. It has been one of the leading institutions of higher education in Turkey for 124 years. The university promoted itself rapidly to international stature together with the faculties of Engineering, Medicine and Dentistry where the media of instruction are Turkish and English. The university includes the Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences, which provides education in four languages: Turkish, English, French and German, thus making Marmara University the only “multilingual” university in Turkey. Having a remarkable success especially in the areas of Medicine, Law and Fine Arts, the faculty members and the students compete in their participation and dedication to academic work to enhance the education quality and the effective implementation of scientific studies in Marmara University.
Marmara University provides up-to-date contemporary education, fulfilling the requirements of today’s modern society with the guidance of the norms of enlightenment and prepares students for the future through participatory democratic administration in accordance with the principles set by the constitution of Turkey. In pursuit of these goals, 2839 faculty members are employed, including 558 professors, 234 associate professors, 569 assistant professors, 237 lecturers, 987 research assistants, 172 instructors, 78 specialists, and 3 translators, 1 education planner along with 1354 administrative personnel. 500 faculty members are teaching at other universities, thus sharing their knowledge and experience of Marmara tradition. 
Marmara University has 57,000 students, of whom 44,661 are undergraduate students and 7,406 graduate students. A total of 1,354 foreign students from 73 countries are studying at the institution. Female students constitute 54% of the total population.http://www.marmara.edu.tr/tr/universitemiz/genel-bilgiler

==Alumni==

==Organization==

Marmara University comprises 14 faculties, 9 vocational schools of higher education (generally providing 2-year associate bachelor degrees and 4-year Bachelors' in some cases), 11 graduate institutes and 32 research centers. The university offers 136 associate bachelor's and bachelor degree programmes. 
Marmara University has a Center of Continuing Education offering 20 certificate programmes in a variety of areas, including foreign languages, computer training and initial teacher training courses. Marmara University is unique among Turkish universities in that it is the only one that offers education at both undergraduate and post-graduate levels in four languages of instruction: Turkish, French, English and German.

==Faculties==

==E-Campus for Students==

==Graduate Schools==

==Vocational Schools==

===Four-year Programs===

===Two-Year Programs===

==International profile==

Welcoming international students as well as providing education at international standards in almost all fields, Marmara University, with its long history, had rapidly became a modern and international university which hosts and participates in scientific meetings, cultural activities, art exhibitions and sports along with various other national and international events. Marmara University is one of the few Turkish universities, which is a member of the European University Association (EUA). Faculties of Engineering and Technical Education are also carrying out their international studies through ABET. The Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences and the Institute of Social Sciences are in the process of preparation for the quality assessment carried out by EQUIS, an international system of accreditation in management and business administration in Europe. The Institute of Social Sciences is now an institutional member of EFMD, European Foundation for Management Development. The Faculty of Law consistently participates in several moot court competitions around the globe such as Phillip C. Jessup Moot Court Competition in United States and Willem C. Vis Moot Court Competition in Austria. The Faculty of Law along with the Department of Political Science and International Relations represents the university in several different Model United Nations programs every year. By Socrates program university hosted 120 faculty members, while sending 53 abroad in tle last 5 years.
Serving students among 73 countries, the university has always been proactive in forming and extending its international relations. To realize its international presence, Most recently Marmara University acts to forge links with other European universities and also with the institutions outside the EU that will allow students and researchers to access a wide range of opportunities. Many academic units within the university have been successful in developing student/lecturer exchanges within the framework of the LLP, Erasmus/Socrates programmes offered by the European Commission. Within the Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences, the Department of Political Science and International Relations alone has developed Erasmus Agreements with the Centre for European Studies, Jagiellonian University, Poland; Department of Political Science, Stockholm University, Sweden; Faculty of Preservation of Cultural Heritage, University of Bologna, Italy; Faculty of Political and Social Science, University of Antwerp, Belgium; Institute for Political Science, University of Regensburg, Germany and the Institute for Political Science, Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz, Germany; College of Social Pedagogy, Alice Salomon Vocational College Hannover, Germany. While the Faculty of Law has its links with University of Munster, Free University of Berlin, University of Bielefeld, University of Cologne from Germany, University of Athens from Greece, University of Linz from Austria, Paris Descartes University from France and University of Siena from Italy.
The International Office of Marmara University and the student oriented ESN Marmara organisation provide support to the foreigner students among the university. Every year the students of Marmara University Management Club organize an 'International Week' to promote the social standings of the international community of Marmara University along with offering a wide-ranged cultural program to the guest-students invited from all across the world to the event. http://erasmus.marmara.edu.tr/

===Efficiency in Erasmus Programme===

Between 2003-2004 and 2009-2010 educational terms university has sent 1097 students abroad by Erasmus Programme. The students who admitted to program had chances to study 1-2 terms in one of the 230 partner universities of 22 European Countries. %95 of the admitted students applied to the undergraduate and graduate programs while other %5 had the chance of admitting to the foreign internship programs. Mentioned students financially supported in their time abroad by the university and European Commission. In the same time sequence Marmara University hosted 839 European students with the same programme. Due to the statistics published by the EU Education and Youth Programms Center, Marmara University is one of the top 3 choices among the foreigner students who have applied to the exchange programs offered in Turkey.http://erasmus.marmara.edu.tr/
Marmara University, offers free intensive language courses(EILC) in Turkish for the foreigner students since 2006. By this program university had the honour of winning the European Language Label, an award offered from European Commission.

==Campus==

Marmara University has 12 campuses, with one of them serving as a hospital, widespread to the city of Istanbul.
The broadcasting around campuses are listed below:

===Sports===

Sports activities are officially organized by the Directorate of Health Culture and Sports for the student body. The student body and the personnel at the Marmara University can benefit from different kinds of sports and leisure activities. The facilities are provided for many different kinds of sports such as basketball, volleyball, chess, table-tennis, dancing, fitness, tae-bo and mountaineering.
On the Göztepe Campus, there is a Sports Hall with a capacity of 850 that can be expanded to 2000. In addition to the big hall, there are three smaller multi purpose halls, three classrooms, a fitness center, a billiards saloon, and a dark room for the members of the Photography Club and for those who take photography courses. On the Campus there are open courts for tennis, volleyball and basketball.
The students are encouraged to take part in men’s and women’s school teams for volleyball, basketball and soccer at the Rectorate Cup, in the tournaments for chess and table tennis and in the inter university games.
On the Anadoluhisarı Campus where the School for Physical Education and Sports is situated, there is a multi-purpose sports hall, areas of indoor and outdoor sports activity (such as tennis, volleyball), field sports (such as football and soccer), and other sports (such as gymnastics, fitness and wrestling). There is an indoor olympic swimming pool, a mini golf course, a boathouse and an athletism track.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


