[[Geoffrey Hill]]

CATEGORIES: People from Bromsgrove, English poets, Formalist poets, Alumni of Keble College, Oxford, Fellows of Keble College, Oxford, Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Fellows of the Royal Society of Literature, Fellows of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, 1932 births, Living people, Cholmondeley Award winners, Knights Bachelor, Academics of the University of Leeds, Oxford Professor of Poetry

Sir Geoffrey William Hill, FRSL (born 18 June 1932) is an English poet, professor emeritus of English literature and religion, and former co-director of the Editorial Institute, at Boston University. Hill has been considered to be among the most distinguished poets of his generation and the "greatest living poet in the English language".Harold Bloom, ed. Geoffrey Hill (Bloom's Modern Critical Views), Infobase Publishing, 1986.[tpl]cite news|first=Nicholas|last=Lezard|url=http://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/20/broken-hierarchies-poems-geoffrey-hill-review|title=Broken Hierarchies: Poems 1952-2012 by Geoffrey Hill – review|newspaper=The Guardian|date=20 November 2013|accessdate=20 November 2013[/tpl] In June 2010 he was elected Professor of Poetry in the University of Oxford.Timesonline.co.uk

==Biography==

Geoffrey Hill was born in Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, England, in 1932. When he was six, his family moved to nearby Fairfield in Worcestershire, where he attended the local primary school, then the grammar school in Bromsgrove. "As an only child, he developed the habit of going for long walks alone, as an adolescent deliberating and composing poems as he muttered to the stones and trees."Sherry, Vincent. The Uncommon Tongue: The Poetry and Criticism of Geoffrey Hill. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press, 1987. 2 On these walks he often carried with him Oscar Williams' A Little Treasury of Modern Poetry (1946), and Hill speculates: "there was probably a time when I knew every poem in that anthology by heart."  In 1950 he was admitted to Keble College, Oxford to read English, where he published his first poems in 1952, at the age of twenty, in an eponymous Fantasy Press volume (though he had published work in the Oxford Guardian — the magazine of the University Liberal Club — and The Isis).
Upon graduation from Oxford with a first, Hill embarked on an academic career, teaching at the University of Leeds from 1954 until 1980, from 1976 as Professor of English Literature. After leaving Leeds, he spent a year at the University of Bristol on a Churchill Scholarship before becoming a teaching Fellow at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he taught from 1981 until 1988. He then moved to the United States, to serve as University Professor and Professor of Literature and Religion at Boston University. In 2006, he moved back to Cambridge, England.
Hill is married to Alice Goodman, and they have one daughter.

===Awards and honours===

Hill was awarded an honorary D.Litt. degree by the University of Leeds in 1988, the same year he received an Ingram Merrill Foundation Award. Hill is also an Honorary Fellow of Keble College, Oxford; an Honorary Fellow of Emmanuel College, Cambridge; a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature; and since 1996 a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 2009 his Collected Critical Writings won the Truman Capote Award for Literary Criticism, the largest annual cash prize in English-language literary criticism."Geoffrey Hill wins 2009 Truman Capote Award for Literary Criticism", University of Iowa news release, April 14, 2009.
Hill was knighted in the 2012 New Year Honours for services to literature.[tpl]LondonGazette |issue=60009 |date=31 December 2011 |startpage=1 |supp=yes [/tpl]

===Oxford candidacy===

In March 2010 Hill was confirmed as a candidate in the election of the Professor of Poetry in the University of Oxford, with a broad base of academic support.He was nominated by Andrew Graham (Master of Balliol), Brendan Callaghan (Master of Campion Hall), Christopher Lewis (Dean of Christ Church), Richard Carwardine (President of Corpus Christi), Ralph Waller (Principal of Harris Manchester), Dame Averil Cameron, DBE (Warden of Keble), Tim Gardam (Principal of St Anne's), Roger Ainsworth (Master of St Catherine's), Sir Ivor Roberts, KCMG (President of Trinity), and Hermione Lee, CBE (President of Wolfson) as well as by Bernard Silverman (formerly Master of St Peter's). He was also nominated by the Most Revd and Rt Hon Dr Rowan Williams and the Rt Revd Dr Geoffrey Rowell, Professor Wade Allison, Professor Alastair Buchan, and Professor Valentine Cunningham.Nominees. Last updated 18 May 2010. Accessed 3 June 2010. He was ultimately successful.

==Writing==

Hill's poetry encompasses a variety of styles,  from the dense and allusive writing of King Log (1968) and Canaan (1997) to the simplified syntax of the sequence 'The Pentecost Castle' in Tenebrae (1978)  to the more accessible poems of Mercian Hymns (1971), a series of thirty poems (sometimes called 'prose-poems' a label which Hill rejects in favour of 'versets'In 'An Interview' with John Haffenden Hill remarks: "They're versets of rhythmical prose. The rhythm and cadence are far more of tuned chant than I think one normally associates with the prose poem. I designed the appearance on the page in the form of versets."  See also: Elisabeth Mary Knottenbelt, Passionate Intelligence: The Poetry of Geoffrey Hill, p. 190) which juxtapose the history of Offa, eighth-century ruler of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Mercia, with Hill's own childhood in the modern Mercia of the West Midlands. Seamus Heaney said of Hill, 'He has a strong sense of the importance of the maintenance of speech, a deep scholarly sense of the religious and political underpinning of everything in Britain'."Interview with Seamus Heaney", Telegraph 11 April 2009 Kenneth Haynes editor, of Broken Hierarchies, commented 'the annotation is not the hard part with Hill's poems... the difficulty only begins after looking things up'.Email to Sameer Rahim, 2013 quoted in an interview with Sameer Rahim 'Poetry as History' Telegraph Review 14 Dec 2013Elegy is Hill's dominant mode, a poet of phrases rather than cadences. Schmidt, Michael The Great Modern Poets Quercus Books , London, 2006 ISBN 9780857382467 Regarding both his style and subject, Hill is often described as a "difficult" poet. In an interview in The Paris Review (2000), which published Hill's early poem "Genesis" when he was still at Oxford, Hill defended the right of poets to difficulty as a form of resistance to the demeaning simplifications imposed by 'maestros of the world'. Hill also argued that to be difficult is to be democratic, equating the demand for simplicity with the demands of tyrants. He makes circumspect use of traditional rhetoric (as well as that of modernism), but he also transcribes the idioms of public life, such as those of television, political sloganeering, and punditry.
Hill has been consistently drawn to morally problematic and violent episodes in British and European history and has written poetic responses to the Holocaust in English, "Two Formal Elegies", "September Song" and "Ovid in the Third Reich". His accounts of landscape (especially that of his native Worcestershire) are as intense as his encounters with history.Hill has also worked in theatre - in 1978, the National Theatre in London staged his 'version for the English stage' of Brand by Henrik Ibsen, written in rhyming verse.Hill's distaste for conclusion, however, has led him, in 2000's Speech! Speech! (118), to scorn the following argument as a glib get-out: 'ACCESSIBLE / traded as DEMOCRATIC, he answers / as he answers móst things these days | easily.' Throughout his corpus Hill is uncomfortable with the muffling of truth-telling that verse designed to sound well, for its contrivances of harmony, must permit. The constant buffets of Hill's suspicion of lyric eloquence—can it truly be eloquent?—against his talent for it (in Syon, a sky is 'livid with unshed snow') become in the poems a sort of battle in style, where passages of singing force (ToL: 'The ferns / are breast-high, head-high, the days / lustrous, with their hinterlands of thunder') are balanced with prosaic ones of academese and inscrutable syntax. In the long interview collected in Haffenden's Viewpoints there is described the poet warring himself to witness honestly, to make language as tool say truly what he believes is true of the world.[ref]Hill's 'seriousness' as a poet is examined in Robert Maximilian de Gaynesford 'The Seriousness of Poetry' Essays in Criticism 59, 2009, 1-21. The main point is that Hill's poetry reveals what his critical reflections in prose sometimes deny: that poetry is capable of performative utterance (in particular of commitment-issuing utterance). 
[/ref]

==Controversy, explanation and parody==

The violence of Hill's aesthetic has been criticised by the Irish poet-critic Tom Paulin, who draws attention to the poet's use of the Virgilian trope of 'rivers of blood' – as deployed infamously by Enoch Powell – to suggest that despite Hill's multi-layered irony and techniques of reflection, his lyrics draw their energies from an outmoded nationalism, expressed in what Hugh Haughton has described as a 'language of the past largely invented by the Victorians'.Tom Paulin, Minotaur: Poetry and the Nation State, p.283. Yet as Raphael Ingelbien notes, 'Hill's England ... is a landscape which is fraught with the traces of a history that stretches so far back that it relativizes the Empire and its aftermath'.Raphael Ingelbien, ''Misreading England: Poetry and Nationhood since the Second World War'', p.34. Harold Bloom has called him 'the strongest British poet now active.'
For his part, Hill addressed some of the misperceptions about his political and cultural beliefs in a Guardian interview in 2002. There he suggested that his affection for the "radical Tories" of the 19th Century, while recently misunderstood as reactionary, was actually evidence of a progressive bent tracing back to his working class roots. He also indicated that he could no longer draw a firm distinction between "Blairite Labour" and the Thatcher-era Conservatives, lamenting that both parties had become solely oriented toward "materialism"."The Praise Singer" The Guardian 10 August 2002
Hill's unmistakable style has also been subject to parody: Wendy Cope includes a two-stanza parody of the Mercian Hymns entitled "Duffa Rex" in Making Cocoa for Kingsley Amis, and Ron Paste's parody 'Preach! Preach!' appears in Other Men's Flowers under the anagrammatic pseudonym "Fogy Hell-Fire."

==Bibliography==

===Poetry collections===

===Essay collections===

==Notes==

==External links==


