[[Brickwood Galuteria]]

CATEGORIES: Hawaii Democrats, Living people, State political party chairs of Hawaii, 1955 births

Brickwood M. Galuteria, born in Honolulu, Hawaii in 1955, is  the Hawaii State Senator representing District 12, encompassing the diverse communities of Waikiki, Ala Moana, Kaka'ako, Downtown, Chinatown, and Kalihi Palama.  He was elected to office in the 2008 general election.  Upon his swearing-in he was assigned to serve on the following four major committees: Ways & Means (WAM), Education & Housing (EDH), Public Safety and Military Affairs (PSM), and named Vice-Chair of the Committee on Tourism (TSM)
He previously served as state chairman of the Democratic Party of Hawaii (2004–2006).

==Early years==

Galuteria was born and raised in the Kaka‘ako and Kapahulu areas, where his entire family worked, played and worshiped.  They lived across from what now is the John A. Burns School of Medicine — an “urban plantation” at the time where a young Brickwood and his friends would surf the waters off of Point Panic near what is now Kakaako Waterfront Park.
Galuteria's family were mostly blue-collar workers. His father, Arnold, worked for United Airlines and was president of his union. His mother, Juliette, worked for the City & County of Honolulu at City Hall.
Galuteria is of Hawaiian, Filipino, and Portuguese descent.  He attended Kamehameha Schools since kindergarten.

==Career==

After high school and some college, Galuteria went to work for Hawaiian Airlines, eventually becoming an account executive and tour director.
Galuteria gave up corporate life to pursue interests in music and meeting people in the entertainment industry.  He performed with Marlene Sai at the Royal Hawaiian Hotel for three years and later forming a group of his own. He also won a coveted Na Hoku Hanohano Award in 1985 for Male Vocalist of the Year and Most Promising Artist.
In 1980, Galuteria began his career on air with KCCN 1420AM, and later with KCCN-FM 100 and Hawaiian 105 KINE. He currently hosts the Na "Oiwi 'Olino "People Seeking Wisdom" morning show on AM940 KKNE with Kimo Kahoano.  Galuteria also worked in television, film and video, serving as host on such local shows as Hawaii’s Kitchen, Treasures and the Easter Seals Telethon on KHON-2 and KITV4’s Ho‘oulu Lahui Aloha.
Galuteria has been a spokesman for the State of  Hawaii’s Department of Agriculture, the Hawaii Visitors and Convention Bureau, Bank of Hawaii and Mike McKenna’s Windward Ford, in addition to commercial voice-over work he’s done for numerous in-house TV, radio and political campaigns.  He has also produced and promoted numerous productions, including the Aloha Festival Concerts, Miss Hawaii Pageants and the Coca-Cola Beach Concert Series.

==Democratic Party Chairman==

Galuteria served as chairman for the Democratic Party of Hawaii in 2004.  Among other accomplishments, he secured funding from the Democratic Party which allowed the local party to flourish.

==References==


