[[J. T. Walsh]]

CATEGORIES: 1943 births, 1998 deaths, 20th-century American male actors, Male actors from California, American male film actors, American expatriates in Ireland, American male television actors, Deaths from myocardial infarction, Male actors from San Francisco, California, University of Rhode Island alumni, People educated at Clongowes Wood College

James Thomas Patrick "J.T." Walsh (September 28, 1943 – February 27, 1998) was an American character actor. He appeared in many well-known films, including Nixon, Hoffa, A Few Good Men, Backdraft, Miracle on 34th Street, Outbreak, Breakdown, Pleasantville, The Negotiator, and Good Morning, Vietnam. Walsh was known for his roles as "quietly sinister white-collar sleazeballs" (quote from Leonard Maltin) in numerous feature films, and was described as "everybody's favorite scumbag" by Playboy magazine.

==Early life==

Walsh was born in San Francisco, California. He had three siblings, Christopher, Patricia and Mary. From 1948 to 1962, the family lived in West Germany, before moving back to the United States. After studying at Clongowes Wood College in Ireland from 1955-1961, Walsh attended the University of Tübingen in Tübingen, Germany and then the University of Rhode Island, where he starred in many college theater productions. In 1974, he was discovered by a director and began working in off-Broadway shows.

==Career==

Walsh did not appear in feature films until 1983, when he had a minor role in Eddie Macon's Run. Over the next 15 years, he played in over 50 feature films, increasingly taking the bad guy role for which he is well known, such as the loudly irascible Sergeant Major Dickerson in Good Morning, Vietnam.
On television, Walsh again portrayed a consummately evil character, prison Warden Brodeur on The X Files episode, "The List" (1995). Brodeur beats a hand-cuffed inmate to death because the inmate informs Brodeur that he will be next on the list of people a former inmate has threatened to kill.
Walsh wanted to show his range as an actor and play good guy parts despite being typecast as a villain. Although he did get to play a few decent people such as the White House Chief of Staff in Outbreak and Chester Van Damme in Sniper, even those films had Walsh portray a character with an amoral streak. Walsh played a member of Majestic 12 in the 1996-1997 sci-fi/drama television series Dark Skies.

==Death and Legacy==

The 1997 thriller Breakdown featured Walsh as the villainous truck driver, which raised his profile to movie audiences. It was his last starring film released during his lifetime.
In his last year, he starred in the 1998 films Hidden Agenda, Pleasantville, and The Negotiator. All three movies, plus Outside Ozona were dedicated to his memory after he died from a heart attack on Friday, February 27, 1998 at the age of 54. He died while a guest of the Optimum Health Institute in Lemon Grove, California.
In addition, Jack Nicholson dedicated his Academy Award for As Good as It Gets to the memory of Walsh, with whom he had starred in A Few Good Men, and in Hoffa in 1992.

==Filmography==

==External links==


