[[Back of the Y Masterpiece Television]]

CATEGORIES: New Zealand comedy television series, TV2 (New Zealand) programmes, C4 (TV channel) programmes

Back Of The Y previously known as Back Of The Y Masterpiece Television is a cult  New Zealand TV series, created by Chris Stapp and Matt Heath. Featuring such memorable characters as Randy Campbell, Danny Parker, Dick Johansonson, Cindy Cockburn and Spanners Watson, the show glorified stunts and the consumption of copious amounts of alcohol. The Hollywood special episode featured Randy Campbell jumping off the back of the Y in the famous Hollywood sign.
Back of the Y is  centred on a mock live TV show, featuring segments such as Randy Campbell's Extreme Stunts and "Cunstables". The show was low budget and apparently filmed with amateur equipment and edited on home computers. The show description at the start of the first episode references one of the cast members and sets the agenda for the rest of the show "Phil Bruff had a dream. To make a New Zealand TV show that wasn't complete shit. He failed... Miserably!!!"
The show consisted of 7 episodes of Back Of The Y Masterpiece Television and The Back Of The Y Goes To Hollywood Special.
In addition to being screened upon New Zealand television, the show has been given airtime on MTV2 in the UK and on Channel V in Australia. They are also responsible for 'That Cunt Rabbit' (an animated TV show for MTV UK), Heck (animated show also for MTV UK) and Balls Of Steel (for Channel 4 UK).
Back Of The Y features the New Zealand band "Deja Voodoo", originally a fictional house band. After Back Of The Y Stapp and Heath developed Deja Voodoo into a "proper" band.
In 2005 Back Of The Y released a TV special,  "Bogan's Heroes" a comedy based on life in prison.
In 2007, Stapp and Heath released The Devil Dared Me To (The Randy Campbell Story). The film is backed by Headstrong Productions, in association with the New Zealand Film Commission. The film tells the story of Randy Campbell, Back of the Y's Stuntman character, and how he rose to become "the worlds greatest stuntman". The film stars Chris Stapp as the titular Randy Campbell, and Matt Heath as Dick Johansonson as well as an all-star New Zealand cast.
Back of the Y begun shooting a second series from Monday 24th Sept 2007 - Friday 28th Sept 2007 at Henderson Valley Studios in Auckland.
The second series of Back of the Y was aired on C4 in New Zealand from 26 May 2008. Series 3 is made up of 6 episodes and a making of special.
They've also had a series in 2010 called "Bogan Family Films" which has already screened earlier in the year.

==Regular features==

Vaseline Warriors: Mad Max parody. Set in a post apocalyptic future where all women have been destroyed. The men fight over ripped up porno mags and vaseline. All is settled following the tragic explosion in the lubridome.
Bottlestore Galactica: Battlestar Galactica parody. Space pilots Steineken and Heinlager get drunk and fly around the galaxy. Most episodes  centred on drinking copious amounts of alcohol and the viewer observing the effects.
Ass/Off : A parody of Face/Off.

==Releases==

==External links==



