[[Julie Vinter Hansen]]

CATEGORIES: 1890 births, 1960 deaths, Danish astronomers, Danish women scientists, Recipients of the Annie J. Cannon Award in Astronomy, University of Copenhagen alumni, University of Copenhagen faculty, University of California, Berkeley faculty, Women astronomers

Julie Marie Vinter Hansen (20 July 1890 – 27 July 1960) was a Danish astronomer.
Vinter Hansen was born in Copenhagen, Denmark.  While studying at the University of Copenhagen, she was appointed a computer at the University's observatory in 1915.  In the pre-electronic era, computers were humans that worked doing hand calculations at the direction of astronomers.  She was the first woman to hold an appointment at the University.  She was later appointed observatory assistant and, in 1922, observer.  She was a very energetic worker, who, along with her normal work of observing and performing mathematical reductions of observations took on the task of editing the Nordisk Astronomisk Tidsskrift (Nordic Astronomy Review).  She later became Director of the International Astronomical Union's telegram bureau and Editor of its Circulars.
By 1939, Vinter Hansen was the First Astronomer at the Observatory of the University of Copenhagen, widely known for her accurate computation of orbits of minor planets and comets.  In that year, she received the Tagea Brandt Rejselegat (travel award), and with the award money undertook a tour through the United States to Japan and back.  On her return trip in 1940, the outbreak of World War II restricted her homeward journey.  She was awarded a Martin Kellogg Fellowship at the University of California which allowed her to work for a time in the United States.  Also in 1940 she was awarded the Annie J. Cannon Award in Astronomy.  
Vinter Hansen was appointed to a knight in the Order of the Dannebrog in 1956 and continued her career at the University of Copenhagen until her death in Mürren, Switzerland in 1960, and was buried in Copenhagen.

==References==


