[[Northern Belle]]

CATEGORIES: Victorian-era passenger ships of the United States, Shipwrecks in the North Sea, Shipwrecks of England, History of Kent, Thanet, Maritime incidents in 1857, 1857 in the United Kingdom

Northern Belle 
was an American transatlantic ship which ran aground near Thanet, England on January 5, 1857.  No lives were lost, thanks to heroic rescue efforts, in blizzard conditions. However, another ship sank en route to the scene, the Margate lugger "Victory" was lost with a crew of 9.
The Northern Belle set out from New York, crossing the Atlantic, only to run into trouble at Thanet, so close to its destination of London.  At 3 am, on a bitter-cold morning, it became apparent that a ship was in some peril in local waters near the little harbour of Broadstairs. 
The ship had been cast ashore on a dangerous ledge of rocks below the Foreness Point, at Kingsgate, between Broadstairs and the coast of Margate. On seeing the plight of the Northern Belle's crew, the Coastguard had sent warning to Broadstairs, and so, despite the severe conditions prevailing, the Mary White and Culmer White lifeboats were hauled overland by horse-drawn trailer, against the blizzard, to a point where they could be safely launched.

==The rescue==

Whilst these preparations were underway, the lugger Ocean managed to rescue five of the Northern Belle's crew, leaving some 25 men still on board the stricken vessel.
In the 1850s, with two life craft, it was the regular practice for the boatmen to have one lifeboat ready at the harbour, and the other on its launching trailer stored in the coachyard of the Rose Inn, which had been a coaching inn since 1784, with the horses stabled in nearby Albion Street, close to the pier. In this way, one boat could always be taken to any part of the Thanet coast without delay. On this occasion, so fierce was the wind however, that both lifeboats had to be moved overland, one being reloaded from the pier.
In accordance with the prominent local historian William Lapthorne's careful reconstruction of the event,
Cold, wet and exhausted but rescued, the American survivors were taken to an inn overlooking the bay and the scene of the disaster. All involved were there able to thaw out before a blazing log fire, in the bar's "cozy parlour" where food and hot rum was served and warming blankets given around.

==Recognition==

In response to these events the then American President, Franklin Pierce ordered 25 Silver Medals to be struck which, together with a sum of salvage money, were awarded to each of the lifeboat crews. It is believed that this is the only known occasion on which such a medal has ever been awarded to an English lifeboat crew.
Perhaps the following day, but certainly very soon afterwards, the Mary White, with both lifeboat crews aboard, was drawn through the narrow streets of Broadstairs, proudly displaying the American ensign of the Northern Belle.
Again with thanks to the diligent work of W. H. Lapthorne, a memorandum from one Lawrence Macey, an official of that State department, was unearthed from the United States National Archive in Washington, which had been sent to President Franklin Pierce; 
The response being:
The names of those recorded of the lifeboatmen on the rescue of the Northern Belle, wrecked of Kingsgate, Broadstairs that 5 January:
It is not clear on which specific journey Robert Parker and Robert Gilbert participated, or if they assisted with the haul-off, and remained ashore, but their names also appear on the salvage list, along with a Fred Lawrence.
George Emptage was the only man to make all three journeys, to and from the wreck. The salvage list was compiled by General Robert Campbell, United States Consul in London at the time. He also launched an appeal to all Americans living in Britain, requesting them to give generously by means of subscription to a fund, raising money to provide for the widows and orphans of the nine-man crew of the Margate lugger “Victory”, which was lost with all hands going to the aid of the “Northern Belle” (Lapthorne).
John Laing, a boatman of Broadstairs wrote an article and sent it to The Times detailing the event for the nation of the fate of the Margate lugger Victory. The loss of the crew of the lugger must have been a hard blow for the robust boatmen of Thanet however, and later was the inspiration of the founding of a surfboat service which, over the next 50 years, became famous in its own right for the lives saved and the misfortune it suffered at the perils of wind and sea: the "Friend of all Nations" and the later ‘Friend to all Nations’.
A tablet recording the names of those men lost on the lugger as she turned over, and went down, was inscribed and placed on Margate Pier, but is lost today. Out of due respect for these men, here is a list of their names:
The London Illustrated News carried a lengthy account of the rescue and, in reference to the Culmer boatmen, quote:

==Today==

After the event, one of Margate's oldest pubs, the "Watermans Arms" was renamed the "Northern Belle", and timber salvaged from the shipwreck was used to renovate the pub. The original wooden beams and davitts, which became bar posts, are still visible today. The pub is still called the "Northern Belle" and is still open daily. During the Second World War and the Cold-War years, the pub was used by American airmen. (margate historical society)
There are some items salvaged from the "Northern Belle" on display in the Margate Museum, alongside a medal awarded to Robert Parker.

