[[Patty Wagstaff]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 births, Living people, Female aviators, American aviators, Aerobatic pilots, National Aviation Hall of Fame inductees, Aviators from Missouri

Patty Wagstaff (née Patricia Rosalie Kearns Combs; born 11 September 1951 in St. Louis, Missouri) is an aerobatic pilot from the United States. Wagstaff traveled all over the world as a child; her father was a pilot for Japan Airlines, and Wagstaff would travel to Southeast Asia, Australia and Alaska to prepare for her own career as a pilot. Her first lesson was on a Cessna 185; since then, she has earned licenses to fly multiple classes of aircraft, including helicopters. Her sister, Toni, is a pilot for Continental Airlines.Patty Wagstaff, International Council of Air Shows Foundation Hall of Fame, accessed April 4, 2010.
In 1985 Wagstaff qualified for the US Aerobatic Team and competed  until 1996. She was the top U.S. medal winner, winning gold, silver and bronze medals in international competition for several years. In 1987 she earned the Rolly Cole memorial award for her contributions to the aerobatic sports, and in 1991, she won her first of three US National Aerobatic Championships, the first woman to win that competition.AW & ST, p. 10 In 1991, Western Flyer's Magazine readers chose her as their favorite pilot. She was the International Aerobatic Club champion in 1993. In 1994, her Goodrich-sponsored Extra 260 airplane was put on display next to Amelia Earhart's Lockheed Vega at the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum.2006 Hall of Fame inductee Patty Wagstaff
From 1988 to 1994, she won the Betty Skelton First Lady of Aerobatics award six times in a row.
In 1996 Wagstaff was the top-scoring US pilot at the World Aerobatics Championship. In 1996 she also won the GAN & Flyer Magazine Reader's Choice award as favorite female pilot, as well as the Charlie Hillard trophy.
Wagstaff's honors were not limited to awards and championships, and in 1997, she received her first Hall of Fame induction, being inducted into the Arizona Aviation Hall of Fame as well as the International Women's Aviation Hall of Fame. In 1997 she was awarded the NAA Paul Tissandier diploma, and she won the Bill Barber award for sportsmanship in 1998. In 2002 she won the Katherine and Marjorie Stinson award, and in 2004, she was elected into what is arguably aviation's most prestigious Hall of Fame, the National Aviation Hall of Fame. In December 2006 Wagstaff was inducted into the International Council of Air Shows Foundation Hall of Fame. In March 2013 she was named the recipient of the Outstanding Aviator Award, presented by The Wings Club of New York.Honors and Elections, Aviation Week & Space Technology, 18 March 2013, p. 10
Based in St. Augustine, Florida, Wagstaff continues working in the aviation field as an airshow pilot, stunt pilot for films, consultant, flight instructor and author. She is Emeritus Board Member of the Smithsonian Institution, National Air and Space Museum. She was on the Presidential Advisory Committee to the Centennial of Flight commission. She flies airshows across North America in a variety of airplanes including the Extra, T-6 and P-51 Mustang. In addition to airshows, Wagstaff has flown OV-10 Broncos as a seasonal firefighter in California.
Patty Wagstaff has been featured numerous times in Microsoft's Flight Simulator series.
Wagstaff is an instrument-rated pilot who flies herself to her airshow performances. She has owned a Beechcraft Baron and a Cirrus, and currently flies a V-Tailed Beechcraft K-35 with her two dogs and parrot.[tpl]Cite journal|magazine=Sport Aviation|date=July 2012|author=Mark Phelps|title=My other airplane is a '59 Bonanza[/tpl]

==Awards and honors==

==References==

==External links==


