[[Old soldiers' home]]

CATEGORIES: American military personnel, Old soldiers' homes, Old soldiers' homes in the United States, Veterans' homes

An old soldiers' home is a military veteran's retirement home, nursing home, or hospital, or sometimes even an institution for the care of the widows and orphans of a nation's soldiers, sailors, and marines, etc.

==United States==

The first national veterans' home in the United States was the United States Naval Home approved in 1811, but not opened until 1834 in the Philadelphia Naval Yard. The Naval Home was moved to Gulfport, Mississippi in 1976."US History Encyclopedia: Soldiers' Home" in Answers.com at http://www.answers.com/topic/old-soldiers-home (Retrieved 4 January 2010), and Philadelphia Area Consortium of Special Collections Libraries (PACSCL), "Views of the U.S. Naval Asylum and Hospital, Philadelphia" in Philadelphia Area Consortium of Special Collections Libraries at http://archives.pacscl.org/shows/navalhome/index.html (Retrieved 4 January 2010). It was subsequently opened to veterans of other services and is now the Gulfport Campus of the Armed Forces Retirement Home.https://www.afrh.gov/afrh/gulf/gulfcampus.htm
The first Army national old soldiers' home in the U.S. was established in Washington, D.C. in 1851.Ellis, Angela; Carl S. McCarthy. "Soldiers' Home." Dictionary of American History. The Gale Group Inc. 2003. Encyclopedia.com. (29 December 2009). http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1G2-3401803936.html The Old Soldier's Home (Washington), now known as the Armed Forces Retirement Home, was the site of President Abraham Lincoln's summer home during the Civil War and is adjacent to National Cemetery, the first federal military cemetery in the U.S.  President Lincoln's Cottage has been designated a National Monument, and recently underwent renovation.  It reopened to the public on President's Day, 18 February 2008. The Home has remained in continuous use since its establishment in 1851. It is located on a beautiful [tpl]convert|250|acre|km2|sing=on[/tpl] wooded campus overlooking the U.S. Capitol in the heart of D.C. and continues to serve as a retirement home for U.S. enlisted men and women.  Both the Washington D.C. and Gulfport soldiers' and sailors' homes are funded through a small monthly contribution from the pay of members of the U.S. Armed Services.
Following the American Civil War the federal government increased the number of National Military Homes, and took over a few formerly state-run old soldiers' homes. By 1933 there were 17 federally managed veterans homes. All except the first two of these homes were eventually combined with other federal government agencies to become part of what is now called the Veterans Administration, or U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs established in 1930.
Caring for the disabled and elderly, and the widows and orphans of men who died in the war became a concern even before the Civil War ended. For example, in 1864 Fitch's Home for Soldiers and Their Orphans was opened with private donations in Connecticut. Various female benevolent societies pushed for the creation of a long-term care federal or state soldier home system at the end of the war.Trevor K. Plante, "Genealogy Notes: The National Home for Disabled Volunteer Soldiers" in Prologue Magazine Online Spring 2004, Vol. 36, No. 1 at http://www.archives.gov/publications/prologue/2004/spring/soldiers-home.html (Retrieved 17 December 2009). Large veterans organizations like the Grand Army of the Republic and United Confederate Veterans eventually also worked for the creation of federal and state homes to care for disabled or elderly veterans. In a few cases veterans organizations on their own raised the money to buy property and build veterans homes. Most of these were quickly turned over to the state government to fund and manage. The majority of state legislatures established veterans homes paid for by state monies from the start. 43 states managed 55 functioning state veterans homes before 1933. Fourteen of those states also had a federal veterans home open at the same time as their state veterans home.
Eleven states had two or more state veterans homes in operation at the same time (two of which also had a federal home). Some states simply had several homes at once. A few states admitted veterans' widows, and a few other states established separate homes for the widows and orphans. A few states had separate Union and Confederate old soldiers' homes. The first of 16 Confederate homes was opened in 1881 in Georgetown, Kentucky.R. B. Rosenburg, Living Monuments: Confederate Soldier's Homes in the New South (Chapel Hill, N.C.: Univ. of North Carolina Press, 1993), 28–29, citing Georgetown Weekly Times, 13 July; 30 November 1881; 14 November 1883; "Confederate Soldiers' Home," "Subscribers to Confederate Soldiers' Home and Widows' and Orphans' Asylum," Kentucky State Archives, Frankfort; Southern Historical Society Papers, 11 (1883): 432. Confederate soldiers' homes were supported entirely by subscribers, or by their state with no funds from the federal government against which the Confederates had fought.
A few state-run old soldiers' homes were eventually folded into the federal veterans home system. As their last few Civil War veterans were dying in the 1930s, some states chose to close their old soldiers' homes, and other states began admission of veterans from more recent wars. Several of these state old soldiers' homes have been modernized and serve veterans to this day.
Soldier homes in major cities were among the earliest, usually starting more as hotels for men passing through town, but increasingly taking on disabled servicemen. These were usually operated as paying businesses rather than being fully funded by the government. Philadelphia had two soldiers' homes which were associated with nearby saloons and got their start as a part of the refreshment and lodging business.Library Company of Philadelphia, "McA 5778.F Civil War Volunteer Saloons and Hospitals Ephemera Collection 1861‐1868" ([Philadelphia, Pa.: LCP, 2006), 5. Digitized at http://www.librarycompany.org/mcallister/pdf/saloons.pdf (Retrieved 16 December 2009). Women activists also helped establish disabled soldiers' homes in Boston, Chicago, and Milwaukee, or in conjunction with the U.S. Sanitary Commission in 25 other cities. The Boston home closed in 1869, the Philadelphia homes closed in 1872, the Chicago Soldiers' Home lasted until 1877, and Milwaukee turned into a federal home.
During the Civil War the U.S. Sanitary Commission provided Union servicemen "Temporary aid and protection,—food, lodging, care, etc.,—for soldiers in transitnsic, chiefly the discharged, disabled, and furloughed." By 1865 the Commission operated 18 "soldiers' homes," 11 "lodges," and one "rest" in 15 states north and south (for a list see Commission bulletin, 3:1279). Most of their homes were war-time facilities and were closed at war's end. They are not included in the following list.

===List of historic old soldiers' and sailors' homes within the United States===

(by state)This list does not include soldiers' orphans' homes separate from the old soldiers' home, nor U.S. Sanitary Commission soldiers' homes.
  | last = O’DEA GAUGHAN
  | first = Timothy
  | authorlink =
  | coauthors =
  | title = Veterans Home marks 125 years
