[[Oaths of Strasbourg]]

CATEGORIES: Earliest known manuscripts by language, Bibliothèque nationale de France collections, Oaths of allegiance, Franks, 842 in Europe, History of Strasbourg, Gallo-Romance languages, Old French, Old High German, Carolingian dynasty, 9th-century treaties, 9th century in France, 9th century in Germany

The Oaths of Strasbourg (842) were mutual pledges of allegiance between Louis the German (876), ruler of East Francia, and his half-brother Charles the Bald (†877), ruler of West Francia. They are written in three different languages: Medieval Latin, Old French and Old High German. The Old French passages are generally considered to be the earliest texts in a language that is distinctly French.

==Historical context==

The several pledges were spoken at a strategic meeting in 842 at Strasbourg, with the brothers' assembled armies in attendance and participating in the ceremonies. In addition to their promised allegiance to the other, Louis and Charles pledged their solidarity to oppose their eldest brother Lothair, ruler of Middle Francia and, nominally, emperor of all the Carolingian Empire Frankish kingdoms as well as Holy Roman Emperor.
The historical nature of the meeting is made more remarkable by the additional, separate pledges that were scripted for the monarchs' armies – in their respective vernaculars – to the effect that, for each "soldier": should their own lord-king unilaterally break the oath just pledged (to the other king), then, each "soldier of the oath" promises not to help his master against the abused other monarch. 

==Sources and contents==

The sole source for the wording of the oaths is Nithard's Historiae or De dissensionibus filiorum Ludovici pii (On the Dissensions of the Sons of Louis the Pious), where it is found in Chapter V of Book III. Nithard's work is preserved in a manuscript from the 10th or 11th century (Cod. Lat. 9768 in the Bibliothèque nationale in Paris) and the text of the oaths is on folios 12v-13r. (A later, 14th-century manuscript is a copy of Cod. Lat. 9768 and therefore of no independent value as a source.)
Both kings first made the same preamble speech, which was a detailed complaint against Lothair. Each king then swore his individual oath in front of their assembled armies, not in Latin nor in his own language, but in the vernacular of the other's kingdom. Finally, the armies swore separate pledges in their respective languages. 
One version of the pledges was written in the Rhenish Franconian dialect of Old High German. The second version is in a form of Proto-French. The preamble was also written in Latin, as were sections to report the ceremonies.

==Historical and linguistic significance==

The text is significant to both linguists and historians.  Linguistically, the text is the oldest document written in a Romance language, and specifically in a form of French.  The documents also shed light on a significant period in the history of the Carolingian-Frankish empire.  Historians have long used the coexistence of these bilingual documents to illustrate their theory that, by 842, the empire had begun splitting into separate proto-countries and developing with different languages and customs.
However, others of late have come to favour a different hypothesis: that the Frankish Kingdom comprised several regna (loosely translated as kingdoms) that since ancient times had maintained different customs and dialects. Supporting this theory they note that both Charlemagne and Louis the Pious sent their sons to be raised in the respective regna which they were designated to inherit, in order to better enlist the support of the local populus by becoming familiar with them and their customs.

==Text==

The transcriptions are edited, with abbreviations written out and some punctuation and word boundaries inserted.For a closer transcription, and a summary of proposed emendations for the passages in Romance, see Foerster and Koschwitz (1902, cols. 45–48).
The image to the right is a scan of the original text. In the transcription below, two asterisks mark the beginning and end of the text visible in this scan.
The following is the Romance vernacular part in its original manuscript form and a close transcription (with minimal editing):

==See also==

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==

==Further reading==


