[[Half Hollow Hills Central School District]]

CATEGORIES: School districts in New York, Huntington, New York, Babylon (town), New York, Education in Suffolk County, New York

Half Hollow Hills Central School District (#5) is located in Dix Hills and Melville, New York. The district includes parts of both Huntington and Babylon townships. The school district contains eleven schools (seven elementary schools, two middle schools, and two high schools). The current superintendent of schools is Mrs. Kelly Fallon.

==SchoolsHalf Hollow Hills: OUR SCHOOLS==

High Schools (9–12):
High School East ("Hills East" or "HSE"),
High School West ("Hills West" or "HSW")
Middle Schools (6–8):
Candlewood Middle School,
West Hollow Middle School
Elementary Schools (K-5):
Chestnut Hill Elementary School,
Forest Park Elementary School,
Otsego Elementary School,
Paumanok Elementary School,
Signal Hill Elementary School,
Sunquam Elementary School,
Vanderbilt Elementary School

==High School East==

High School East is located at 50 Vanderbilt Parkway in Dix Hills, New York,Half Hollow Hills: HIGH SCHOOL EAST across the street from the Dix Hills branch of the The Half Hollow Hills Community Library. Hills East is fed from West Hollow Middle School and is the larger of the two high schools in the district. The current principal is Dr. Jeffery Woodberry, who started in Fall of 2007. The building was once used as both a middle school and a high school, which were located side-by-side and connected to one another, so the building is sprawling. For the same reason, Hills East has redundant facilities: two main offices, two nurses' offices, two gymnasiums (and two pairs of men's and women's locker rooms), two auditoriums, and two cafeterias (one has since been converted to a weight room). The class of 1978 was the last class where East was the exclusive high school in the district; commencing in 1979 there were graduating classes from both high schools.

===Facilities===

High School East features a Planetarium, located one floor above the main office. It features a Spitz A3P planetarium projector, and is usually used to host class trips from the middle and elementary schools, in addition to being the home of the Hills East Astronomy Club, where students are taught about the night sky, astronomy and mythology by fellow students and teachers.Half Hollow Hills: CLUBS AND ACTIVITIES
High School East also contains the Eugene Orloff Auditorium, which seats a total of 2,200 on two levels, making it the second largest not-for-profit auditorium on Long Island. It hosts various school events throughout the year, including the Spring Musical, Graduation, Academic Awards, and Athletic Awards. The space is also rented out to local companies for events throughout the year. The stage is a full Broadway-sized stage (88 feet wide, 49 feet deep, three stories tall for fly space (hanging scenery)). The stage has an orchestra pit containing two pistons (although only one functions) that are capable of raising and lowering the pit. The Eugene Orloff Auditorium is infamous for its low quality acoustics, as it was constructed of concrete and never completed. The music wing of the school is located in the hallway right behind the stage. 
The school also has a recently renovated Lecture Hall. It is usually the host of small gatherings and meetings, as well as Advanced Placement exams.

===Student life===

Hills East was ranked #209 in 2007 and 361 in 2012 on the Newsweek list of Best High Schools in America. Currently, Hills East is a part of the Long Island Forensics Association, and has been extremely proficient in Speech and Debate, Quizbowl, We the People, tennis, Science Olympiad, and most recently, chess.  The school has formed its own chapter of the National Federation of American Students. In the 2010–2011 school year, a District Student Government was initiated by students from East.
Student Government at High School East is overseen by a faculty adviser. Mr. Glen Cochrane held this position for over 30 years at High School East, but retired in June 2012. Under the direction of former Student Government Chairman Joshua Shinbrot, the Class of 2012 funded the renovation and renaming of the student center in honor of Mr. Cochrane's commitment to the students of High School East. This renovation was completed in March 2013.  

====Mascot====

The school mascot of Hills East is the Thunderbird, which wears the school colors: red, black, and white.

==High School West==

High School West (HSW), commonly referred to as "Hills West" within its district, is located at 375 Wolf Hill Road in Dix Hills, New York. High School West, which was built in 1975, includes a natatorium adjacent to the "North Cafeteria" and the track, which sports the school colors, red and gold. It is primarily used for swim meets, community events, gym classes, and occasional school trips from the other schools within the district. The school grounds of High School West are adjacent to those of Signal Hill Elementary School, which is located at the intersection of Wolf Hill Road and Caledonia Road. Students of HSW have generally attended Candlewood Middle School from 6th to 8th grade. The official school mascot is the Colt.http://hhh.k12.ny.us/uploaded/Top_Banner/Schools/HalfHollowHills_HSW.gif Hills West has been successful in a variety of sports including Football, Soccer, Basketball, Volleyball, Track, and Cross Country. In 2009, the Colts cross country team won the Suffolk County A Championship. Then, in 2010, they won the Suffolk County A Championship, but a disqualification of one of the runners led them to take second place. In addition, the Colts have fielded strong baseball teams over the years winning multiple league titles, two county championships, and a state championship in 2003. The Varsity Boys Basketball team finished last season undefeated while winning the Suffolk County AA championship two out of the last three years in a row (2008 and 2010). They also won its first Long Island Championship in school history (2009). Head Coach Bill Mitaritonna was named Newsday HS Basketball Coach of the Year(2010). The Varsity Soccer team made the state semi-finals in 2007. The Hills swim team has gone undefeated and won league and county champs. The Varsity Football Team has made the playoffs the past 5 of 8 years and were the 2009 Long Island Champions. The Hills West dance team, the Wranglerettes, are the 2007 champions in the Long Island Kickline Association competition, winning in the jazz category for the 14th year, and in the newly created hip hop category. The winter track team won 7 straight county titles (2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011) and in the spring of 2007, 2008 and 2009 the spring track team has won the league by going undefeated. Dr. Michael Catapano is the new principal of HSW as of Fall 2013. The assistant principals are Wayne Ebanks, Mary Lippert,and Michael Abrescia. A new turf field has just been completed at the school. The student body of High School West has approximately 1,500 students, but has increased to over 1,700 for the 08-09 school year.

==Candlewood Middle School==

Candlewood is the second middle school that underwent renovations in 2003. The school is located at 1200 Carll's Straight Path, Dix Hills, New York. The current principal is Andrew Greene. The assistant principal's are Traci Roethel and Michael Abrescia. The mascot is the Cougar, and the current school colors are Red and Gold. A track has been completed. Roughly 1,200 students attend the school.

==West Hollow Middle School==

West Hollow is the largest middle school in the district.  It was built in 1970.  Its located at 250 Old East Neck Road, Melville, New York.  The current principal is Milton K. Strong.  The assistant principals are Robert Newton, Steven Hauk, and Allison Beyersdorf.  The mascot is the Wolverine, the current school colors are Red, White, Black and occasionally blue.  Around 1,700 students attend the school.  There are many activities to choose from, such as cheerleading, student government, RIsing Stars, Drama Club, Cooking club, Music Explorations and leaders club.

==Elementary schools==

In 2013, the school board voted unanimously to shutter Chestnut Hill and Forest Park elementary schools due to decreased enrollment, which declined 25 percent since 2007.

==District Programs==

Half Hollow Hills is known for its district-wide theater programs that extends to all schools in the district. This opportunity begins in 5th grade with the "Hills On Stage" program. Recent "Hills On Stage" productions include Free To Be... You and Me, Cinderella, Peter Pan, Honk My Fair Lady, The Wizard of OzHalf Hollow Hills: Hills On Stage and Bye Bye Birdie.
The middle schools recently began a joint theater program also.
Both High School East and High School West are known for their research departments, which have produced a number of Intel Science Talent Search, Intel ISEF, and Siemens Westinghouse Competition finalists over the years.

==Central Office==

Previously Manasquan Elementary School, the Fran Greenspan Administration Center now serves as the central administration building for the Half Hollow Hills School District. It is located on Half Hollow Hills Road, on the same property as High School East. In addition to housing the offices of the Superintendent and other administrators, Central Office serves as the location for a small mock-astronautics program for children and certain community events, as well as child care services. The Academically High Aptitude Program (A.H.A.P) of the district is also held at Manasquan for 3rd-5th graders along with a preschool and Reach CYA.Half Hollow Hills: AHAP

==Notable alumni==

==References==

==External links==


