[[Care Highway]]

CATEGORIES: Humanitarian aid organizations

Care Highway is a humanitarian aid organization that aims to help in areas of the world where people are suffering and are in great need due to catastrophes caused by man or nature.

==History==

The foundation of Care Highway began a number of years ago, when a young teacher/youth worker named Christopher Morrison spent six weeks at a youth centre, which worked mainly with refugees and asylum seekers. This made him look closely at the many areas of difficulty faced by people from developing countries and war torn regions. 
After finishing college, he worked with humanitarian aid projects in the United Kingdom, Bosnia, Croatia, Serbia, Albania, India and Sweden. These projects included health projects, supplying emergency food and medicine; educational projects, starting schools and day care centers; and repatriation projects, helping people home to their families. In Sarajevo, he evaluated a medical centre and starting a missing children project. While working on a large scale with people from many different circumstances in former Yugoslavia, the idea of face to face help interested him greatly.
This idea of dealing with people in an individual humanitarian way became the foundation of the Care Highway humanitarian organization. In 1999 the Care Highway organization was launched in the memory of Mr. Morrison's brother Sean, who was himself a humanitarian worker in Albania.
In its short history, Care Highway has worked with a number of different non-governmental organizations, and because of its "work with all" policy, it has been able to achieve a high degree of success. Care Highway will continue to grow thanks to the confidence and generosity of the peoples of the world.

==Aims and ideals==

Care Highway's ideas are based on human rights and the fact that we are all born as free individuals. Everyone has the right to freedom and security. There is no difference in individual value. We respect and promote human equality.
Care Highway is an independent organization that works with human rights on a practical level and not with issues concerning governments, political factions, ideologies, economic interests, or religious creeds.
Aims of Care Highway:

==Current projects==

==External links==


