[[Covenant Theological Seminary]]

CATEGORIES: Seminaries and theological colleges in Missouri, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, Presbyterianism in Missouri, Presbyterian universities and colleges in the United States, Universities and colleges in St. Louis, Missouri, Evangelical seminaries and theological colleges, Reformed church seminaries and theological colleges, Presbyterian Church in America, Educational institutions established in 1956

Covenant Theological Seminary, sometimes known as Covenant Seminary, is the denominational seminary of the Presbyterian Church in America (PCA).Covenant Theological Seminary, RecordsAmerican Council on Education, American Universities and Colleges, 15th ed., Walter de Gruyter, 1997,  ISBN 3-11-014689-4, p. 885.  It is located in St. Louis, Missouri, and its purpose is to train leaders for work in the church and the world — especially as pastors, missionaries, and counselors. It does not require all students to be members of the PCA, but it is loyal to the teachings of its denomination. Faculty must subscribe to the system of doctrine as outlined in the Westminster Standards.Doctrine

==History==

The seminary was established by Christians in the Evangelical Presbyterian Church, (which later merged with the Reformed Presbyterian Church, General Synod to form Reformed Presbyterian Church-Evangelical Synod), who believed that their denomination, born out of resistance to rising liberal influences, needed a strong theological school of its own. In 1956, Covenant College and Seminary began with eleven students on a plot of land a few miles west of St. Louis, Missouri (having split from Faith Theological Seminary Harriet A. Harris, Fundamentalism and Evangelicals, Oxford University Press, 2008, ISBN 0-19-953253-2, p. 260). The seminary continued to grow in both size and reputation in the years that followed. In 1964, having outgrown its space, the liberal arts undergraduate school, Covenant College, along with its students, faculty, and staff, moved to Lookout Mountain, Georgia to the site of a former luxury hotel.William F. Hull, Lookout Mountain, Arcadia Publishing, 2009, ISBN 0738566446, p. 94.  In 1966, the two institutions formally divided.  In 1982, following another denominational merger (known as the "joining and receiving") between the Reformed Presbyterian Church and the Presbyterian Church in America, Covenant Seminary became the national seminary of the PCA, which elects and oversees the work of the seminary's Board of Trustees.Rick Nutt, "The Tie That No Longer Binds: The Origins of the Presbyterian Church in America." In The Confessional Mosaic: Presbyterians and Twentieth-Century Theology, Milton J. Coalter, John M. Mulder, and Louis B. Weeks (eds.), Westminster John Knox Press, 1990, 066425151X, pp. 236–256.The Presbyterian Church in America: Taking the Reformation into the 21st Century

==Academics==

As a fully accredited seminary by North Central Association of Colleges and Schools in 1973Covenant Theological Seminary, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools. and Association of Theological Schools in the United States and Canada in 1983,Covenant Theological Seminary, Association of Theological Schools in the United States and Canada. Covenant offers several academic degrees: Master of Divinity, Master of Arts (in Educational Ministries, Theological Studies, Counseling, or Exegetical Theology), Master of Theology, and Doctor of Ministry.
The seminary is doctrinally committed to the Reformed faith and Covenant theology, and it believes the Bible to be the inspired and inerrant word of God.
The seminary is also home to the Francis Schaeffer Institute,Scott R. Burson and Jerry L. Walls, C.S. Lewis & Francis Schaeffer: Lessons for a New Century from the Most Influential Apologists of Our Time, InterVarsity Press, 1998, ISBN 0830819355, pp. 14–15. which encourages Christians to engage contemporary culture in a compassionate way with the truth-claims of the gospel.Francis A. Schaeffer Institute

==Head of Covenant Theological Seminary==

As of 28 April 2012, Mark Dalbey was the Acting President of Covenant Theological Seminary. On this date his office announced of decisions by the Board of Trustees, that Bryan Chapell, the current President of Covenant Seminary, would be transitioning from sabbatical to a newly created position of Chancellor on 1 June 2012. On that date Dalbey would assume the position of Interim President. 1 February 2013 brought the announcement that Chappell had taken a pastoral call in Illinois with resignation as Chancellor effective 15 April 2013. On September 26, 2013, Dalbey was inaugurated as President.Inauguration Celebration for President Dr. Mark Dalbey

==Notable alumni==

==References==

==External links==


