[[Tractor vaporising oil]]

CATEGORIES: Petroleum products, Tractors, Fuels, Oils, Internal combustion piston engines

Tractor vaporizing oil (or TVO) is a fuel for internal combustion engines, produced from kerosene. In the United Kingdom and Australia, after the Second World War, it was commonly used for tractors until diesel engines became commonplace. In Australian English it was known as power kerosene.

==History==

The post war Ferguson TE20 tractor, a carefully researched and near-ideal tractor for use on British farms, was designed around a petrol (gasoline) engine, the Standard inline-four. Although there was a campaign for the reintroduction of agricultural Road Duty (tax)-free petrol, which had been curtailed during the war, this was not forthcoming. Perkins Engines supplied some conversions into diesel engines which could use untaxed red diesel.
As a substitute for gasoline, TVO was developed. Kerosene was commonly used as a domestic heating fuel and was untaxed. Kerosene has an octane rating of zero and would damage an engine built for gasoline. The manufacture of kerosene involves the removal of aromatic hydrocarbons from what is now sold as heating oil. These aromatics have an octane rating, so adding some of that otherwise waste product material back in a controlled manner into kerosene gave TVO. The resulting octane rating of TVO was somewhere between 55 and 70.

==Engine modifications==

In practice TVO had most of the properties of kerosene, including the need for heating to encourage vaporization. As a result the exhaust and inlet manifolds were adapted so that more heat from the former warmed the latter. To get the tractor to start from cold, a small second fuel tank was added that contained gasoline. The tractor was started on the expensive gasoline, then – once the engine was warm – the fuel supply switched over to TVO. So long as the engine was working hard, like when plowing or pulling a load, the TVO would burn well. Under light conditions, such as traveling unloaded on the highway, the engine was better on gasoline.
Some tractor designs included a radiator "blind" that would restrict the flow of air over the radiator which led to the engine running hotter, which could help with starting. If the radiator blind was left shut, though, there was a risk of engine damage, especially in warm weather.
The phrase "Gasoline-Kerosene" engine is often used to describe an engine that uses TVO. This can be interpreted either as 
TVO was withdrawn from sale by UK suppliers in 1974. An approximation to the correct specification can be made from petrol and heating oil (burning oil). In the UK there is an exception that permits the use of rebated kerosene and fuel oils in vintage vehicles.HCOTEG12780 – Excise Duty on Oils (Duty Liability): Rebated oils (for off- road and other qualifying uses)

==Notes and references==

==External links==


