[[Hong Kong Federation of Students]]

CATEGORIES: Politics of Hong Kong, Students' unions in Hong Kong, Universities in Hong Kong, Groups of students' unions

Hong Kong Federation of Students ([tpl]zh|t=香港專上學生聯會[/tpl]) is the biggest student organization in Hong Kong. It is formed by the students' union of 7 tertiary education institutions. It has 51,779 members as of March 2006. Its purpose is to push students' movements and increase the participation in society of the students.
It is currently led by Mr Li Shing Hong Samuel, who is the secretary-general of the federation and Mr. Lai Ming Chak Jacky, who is the chairman of the standing committee.
The Council (代表會) is formed by the representatives from the student unions of the universities. The representatives are elected by universities' students. The standing committee is appointed by the Council. The chairman of the Council is currently Mr. Wong K.Hing.

==History==

The federation was founded in May, 1958. The purpose at the moment was to represent the students. There were 4 university student union-members at the moment. There were 7 students in the first term of the committee.
In the Senkaku Islands dispute, at the time of the transfer of the administration of the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands from the United States to Japan in 1971 some Hong Kong students established an association called Hong Kong Protecting Diaoyu Islands Committee (香港保衛釣魚台行動委員會) on 14 February.[tpl]citation needed|date=June 2013[/tpl] The committee held demonstrations in front of the Japanese consulate in Hong Kong; 21 people were arrested; 7 of them were university students. On 17 April, Hong Kong University Student Union held a peace demonstration; about 1000 students took part in this action.
On 7 July, the federation held great demonstration, as the federation was still an illegal organization in that time, some students was arrested by the Hong Kong Police. On 13 May 1975, the federation held the "13 May protest", and it was the last action of those movements.
During 1975 to 1976, the standing committee of the federation was supporting the Cultural Revolution, this angered some students, a student leader, Mak Chung Man, lead students to protest against the Communists, he was then criticized by the federation, the chairman said that he was "against all Chinese". This pronouncement made great resentment to the students, how to handle different opinions became the main topic in the 1976 HKFS election.
In April, 1977, Hong Kong University Student Union suggested to cancel the anti-right wing purpose of the federation but the standing committee refused to vote, all Hong Kong University Student Union representatives announced to withdraw from the conference as a complaint.
In April, 1979, the federation held a memorial party of May Fourth Movement, however nearly no students took part in this activity, it showed that the students was angried of the confused policies of the federation.
During the 1980s, the federation started to support the democratic movements in Taiwan and mainland China.
In 1981 the Hong Kong Standard revealed that the HKFS had been on a 'Red List' in a classified Standing Committee on Pressure Groups (SCOPG) report. The report described the group as "pro-communist".
The federation prosecuted Shue Yan College in March, 1983 of its serious corruption to ICAC, however it was unsuccessful.
After 1984, the federation fully changed its purpose from supporting communism to supporting the democratic development. The students asked for fully democracy in Hong Kong.
In February, 1989, about 4000 students stop attending classes to protest against the policy of the education department of the Hong Kong Government.
During the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, the federation took part in the demonstrations and the strike in China. On 20 May, under the tropical cyclone signal number 8, there was still thousands of students took part in a great demonstration. After the massacre, all universities' students stop attending classes. Since then, there are memorial activities every year. In 1991, there was protests to support Wang Dan, however the police said it was a illegal protest and gave warnings to the committees, this angered the students.
Since the 1990s, the union started to concern about daily events in Hong Kong, no longer just in the areas of education and political.
In 2003, 2004 and 2005, the federation took great part in the 1 July marches. In the one in 2004, students became most important part in the protest.

==Members==

The Hong Kong Federation of Students is formed by the student unions of 7 institutions:

==External links==


