[[Molloy College]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in New York, Universities and colleges on Long Island, Educational institutions established in 1955, Council of Independent Colleges, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, Roman Catholic universities and colleges in the United States, Dominican universities and colleges in the United States, Universities and colleges in Nassau County, New York, 1955 establishments in New York, Roman Catholic universities and colleges in New York, East Coast Conference schools

Molloy College is an independent, private, liberal arts institution located in Rockville Centre on Long Island, New York. 
The college was founded by the Sisters of St. Dominic of Amityville, the Congregation of the Holy Cross in 1955. It opened its first residence hall in 2011. The college also has a 550-seat performing arts facility—The Madison Theatre.
At A Glance
At Molloy College, students gain that “I will” attitude they need to make a difference in our fast-paced, ever changing world.  
Located in Rockville Centre, NY, Molloy offers students a rich and multidimensional educational experience. Our faculty is accomplished, yet approachable, leading small classes where students are encouraged to think critically and explore creatively. 
Through our International Education program, students study abroad, traveling to such exotic and enriching destinations as India, Thailand, Spain, Italy, Belgium, and even Australia.
Molloy’s campus provides for abundant opportunities to explore new interests, pursue career goals, and enrich our community:  
•	Molloy opened its first residence hall in September 2011, and a second one is slated to open in Fall 2014. A new student center also opened in 2011, providing numerous opportunities for students to study and interact with their peers. The student center also includes a new performing arts center, which attracts artists from around the world.
•	Whether it’s participating in a music ensemble, writing for a campus publication, or serving as a student government representative, with more than 40 clubs and honor societies, Molloy has something for each and every student.  And with the addition of residence halls to the campus, Molloy has expanded its Student Life program to include a wide variety of social and service activities and events.
•	New academic programs provide additional opportunities for Molloy students to learn and grow. Recent additions include a New Media major, a four-year degree in Nuclear Medicine Technology, a Theatre Arts degree linked to a leading New York City musical theatre conservatory, and a Healthcare MBA, among others.
•	Athletics and academics go hand-in-hand at Molloy, where students are known for both their athletic and academic success.  Molloy has a winning tradition in a wide variety of NCAA Division II sports, and in 2013 and 2010 the women’s softball team became one of only eight teams in the country to qualify for the College World Series. 
•	Students have exciting opportunities to “fast track” their careers.  With dual bachelor’s/master’s degree program offerings in Accounting, Business Management, Criminal Justice, Music Therapy and Education, Molloy students can complete a dual degree in five years.
•	Students are encouraged to make a difference in local communities and many become involved in Molloy-sponsored service projects such as BoxTown, a simulation program that educates students about homelessness. There are also numerous service trips as well, enabling Molloy students to help the less fortunate both in the United States and abroad.
The College also provides forums welcoming regional, national, and international leaders such as Secretary of State Gen. Colin Powell, best-selling author Malcolm Gladwell, and New York Times columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin.  
Molloy College has built a rich, dynamic, and diverse educational environment over the past 50+ years.  It is within this welcoming yet challenging environment that Molloy College students develop that all-important confidence, that strong, “I will” attitude that enables them to succeed in their careers, and more importantly, to make a difference in our world. 
Location and Environment
Molloy College is located on the South Shore of Long Island in Rockville Centre.  Our proximity to New York City allows for our students to benefit from the cultural and social opportunities that Manhattan has to offer - and it’s just a short train ride away from our 30-acre campus.  
Molloy College also offers off campus locations for study at the Suffolk Center in East Farmingdale, just off of the Rt. 110 corridor.  In addition, the College offers courses at area hospitals and schools - all designed to provide convenience for our graduate and continuing education students.
Off-Campus Opportunities
You can stay local - but still go far - with the International Education program available at Molloy College. At Molloy you can study what you want, where you want, for as long as you want. 
Molloy College also offers students the opportunity to combine job experience and classroom exposure through its internship program.  At Molloy, students are encouraged to participate in internships so that they can gain first-hand knowledge and experience in their future career path.
Majors and Degrees Offered
Molloy College offers the AA degree in liberal arts; the AAS degree in cardiovascular technology, nuclear medicine technology and respiratory care; and the BA or BS degree in accounting, art, biology, business management, communications, computer science, computer information systems, criminal justice, education, English, earth and environmental studies, health service leadership, history, interdisciplinary studies, mathematics, music, music therapy, new media, nuclear medicine technology, nursing, philosophy, political science, psychology,  sociology, Spanish, speech language pathology/audiology, and theology; the BSW degree in Social Work; and the BFA in art, music and theatre arts. Teacher certification programs are available in childhood (1-6), adolescence (7-12), special education and birth – grade 2 childhood special education. Masters degree programs are available in Accounting, Business, Criminal Justice, Education, Music Therapy, Nursing, Speech Pathology and Personal Financial Planning, and there is a Ph.D. program in Nursing. A new Healthcare MBA will be introduced in Fall 2014.
Students interested in pre-dental, pre-law, pre-medical, or pre-veterinary programs are offered special advisement.
Academic Programs
A minimum of 128 credit hours is required for a baccalaureate degree; these courses include a strong liberal arts general education curriculum for every major field of study. Students may choose a double major, and many minors are available. Molloy has a 4-1-4 academic calendar.
Students may earn CLEP and CPE credit, and advanced placement credit is granted for a score of 3 or better on the AP exam. Qualified full-time students may participate in the Army ROTC program at Hofstra University or St. John's University on a cross enrolled basis. Molloy students may also elect Air Force ROTC on a cross enrolled basis with New York Institute of Technology.
Campus Facilities and Equipment
Molloy is a wireless campus and our computer labs house more than 325 PCs.  Also, many departments have their own computer labs with state-of-the-art equipment.
The James E. Tobin Library is the center of academic research on the Molloy College campus. The library houses 110,000 volumes, as well as 685 journals and periodicals in its collection. On-line access to information is very important. The library subscribes to over 40 subscription databases, including but not limited to EBSCO's Academic Search Premier, ProQuest Direct and Sage's Nursing and Health Sciences database giving students and faculty access to thousands of full-text resources. Also in the library is a "smart" classroom used by the librarians for library instruction classes.
The media center houses an extensive collection of DVD's and videos as well as state of the art digital equipment. There is a Faculty Development / Instructional Technology Lab in the Media Center.  The library is a wireless facility.
The Wilbur Arts Center features numerous art and music studios, a cable television studio, and the Lucille B. Hays Theatre. The school also has six science labs, a language lab, the education resource center, two nursing labs, and a behavioral sciences research facility.
Tuition, Room, Board and Fees
Fulltime Undergraduate tuition for 2013-14 was $24,700. In addition, there is approximately $1,100 in required fees. Students can expect to spend about $1,400 on books and supplies, and approximately $2,400.in miscellaneous expenses.
Financial Aid
Financial aid, which is based on academic achievement and financial need, is awarded to more than 85 percent of the student body. Aid is awarded in the form of scholarships, grants, loans, and Federal Work-Study Program employment. Non-need scholarships and grants are also available. Students are required to complete the FAFSA application every year. Students who graduate from high school with a 95 percent average and a minimum combined score of 1280 on the SAT I critical reading and math sections are considered for the Molloy Scholars' Program, which awards full tuition scholarships. Partial scholarships are available through the following: Dominican Scholarships, Fine and Performing Arts Scholarships, Community Service Awards, and other funded scholarships. The Transfer Scholarship Program awards partial tuition scholarships to students transferring into Molloy College with at least a 3.0 cumulative GPA. Nursing transfers are required to have a 3.3 GPA to be eligible for a transfer scholarship. Athletic grants (Division II only) are awarded to full-time students who show superior athletic ability in baseball, basketball, cross-country, equestrian, lacrosse, soccer, softball, tennis, or volleyball.
Student Organizations and Activities
Molloy students are involved in a highly active life outside the classroom, something that the college administration supports and encourages. Whether you are an athlete, an aspiring journalist, someone with a strong opinion, or just someone with a desire to expand your horizons, you will find a group to join here. Such organizations provide students with the opportunity to interact with fellow students as leaders, as part of a team, or in a social environment.
Student-run publications include the yearbook, a literary magazine, and the school newspaper. Molloy College sponsors a number of varsity sports, including baseball, men's and women's basketball, men's and women's cross country, men's and women's lacrosse, men's and women's soccer, softball, women's tennis and women’s volleyball. Recently, women’s basketball participated in the NCAA tournament, and the women’s softball team was one of eight schools in the country to qualify for the NCAA College World Series. The college is a member of the East Coast Conference (ECC) in NCAA Division II.  In addition, they sponsor a club dance team and a co-ed club equestrian team.  The equestrian team is part of the Intercollegiate Horse Show Association.  
The student government is elected from the Molloy Student Association, made up of every member of the student body. Members of the Molloy Student Government provide their classmates with a leadership that keeps extracurricular activities alive, productive, and practical.
Admissions Process
Molloy College's admissions committee recommends that applicants meet the following admission qualifications: graduation from a four-year public or private high school or equivalent (GED test) with a minimum of 20.5 units, including 4 in English, 4 in social studies, 3 in a foreign language, 3 in mathematics, and 3 in science. Nursing applicants must have completed biology and chemistry courses. Mathematics applicants must have taken 4 units of math and 2 of science (including chemistry or physics). Biology applicants must have credits in biology, chemistry, and physics and 4 units in math. Art applicants must submit a portfolio; music students must audition. The committee selects candidates based on the following: high school record, SAT I or ACT scores, class rank, and the school's recommendation. Personality and character are considered in admissions decisions, as are talent or ability in a non-curricular field, as well as alumni relationships. 
A select group of freshmen are invited to participate in the Molloy College Honors Program.  This program offers challenging coursework and encourages reflection and personal growth.  Honors students are provided with several special participation incentives such as a laptop computer, and priority registration.
The HEOP and the Albertus Magnus programs may be options for students not normally eligible for admission. 
Early admission is available. Molloy admits students on a rolling basis and students are advised of the admission decision within a few weeks of completion of the application filing process.
Prospective students should submit the following to the admissions office to be considered for enrollment: a completed application for admission (the Common Application is accepted), a nonrefundable $40 application fee, an official high school transcript or GED score report, official SAT I or ACT score, and official college transcripts (transfer students only).
Fast Facts
Catholic Colleges of Distinction 2012-13
Undergraduate - 3,375 (fall 2013)
Graduate - 1,049 (fall 2013)
Doctoral - 31 (fall 2013)
Honors students made up more than 11 percent of the freshman class in fall 2013 compared to 4 percent in fall 2004.
On average, more than 45 percent of incoming freshmen are first-generation college students.
The average SAT score for incoming freshmen increased over 50 points in the past several years.
Student Life
Molloy campus life includes more than 60 student clubs and honor societies.
The College's first hall opened in Sept. 2011, and a second is scheduled to open in fall of 2014.
Student-athletes compete in the East Coast Conference, Division II.
In 2013, the Molloy women's softball team was one of only eight teams in the country to earn a spot in the College World Series.
Through Molloy's global learning program, students have studied abroad in a wide variety of locations, including Belgium, Italy, France, Spain, England, India, Thailand, Australia and China.
Faculty
More than 68 percent of full-time faculty have doctoral degrees.
The number of full-time faculty members increased more than 15 percent in the past 5 years.
Additional information
Molloy is consistently recognized by national publications as a leading institution in the region
Molloy is ranked among the "Top Tier Institutions by USNews & World Report in its Regional Universities - North category".
The Princeton Review recognized Molloy as one of the "Best Northeastern Colleges." This honor is bestowed on a select number of institutions which The Princeton Review believes "stand out as academically excellent institutions of higher learning."
Molloy ranks in the top ten nationally for the percentage of freshmen returning for their sophomore year (89 percent in 2010).
Molloy's 6 year graduation rate (66 percent - class entering fall 2007) is nearly 10 percent higher than the average for colleges and universities in Queens/Long Island.
Molloy's dedication to students is evident in its small student-faculty ratio (10/1) - one of the lowest in the country.
Yet Molloy continues to grow
The number of undergraduate students at Molloy increased 46 percent since 2003.
The number of students majoring in the College's cutting-edge business and nursing programs have increased more than 30 percent during the same time period.
Enrollment in Molloy's graduate programs has increased more than 20 percent in the past five years.
The Madison Theatre
The "Public Square" facility will allow for an open interchange between student and teacher, students and students and Molloy with the Long Island community. Our vision of community extends beyond our own students, faculty and alumni. Indeed, as Long Island's premier Catholic college, we hope to serve all those who share in our celebration of learning and culture.
The Molloy Gala of 2011 at The Madison Theatre This building contains a 550-seat theatre. Great attention has been paid to the quality of the performance space and to its acoustics. We anticipate offering lectures and discussions, as well as hosting inspiring artistic performances, dance, music and theatre. Through both live performance and via modern media delivery, hundreds of thousands of Long Islanders will benefit from the educational and cultural offerings of this facility.
Please visit the Madison Theatre's site for more detailed information.
Molloy College Official social media channels
Virtual Tour
Molloy College Department of Public Relations

==Undergraduate fields of study==

==Graduate fields of study==

==Athletics==

Molloy College teams participate as a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division II. The Lions are a member of the East Coast Conference (ECC). Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, indoor and outdoor track & field, lacrosse and soccer; while women's sports include basketball, cross country, indoor and outdoor track & field, lacrosse, soccer, softball, tennis and volleyball.

==References==

==External links==


