[[Ben Chin]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, Living people, Canadian people of Korean descent, Canadian political consultants, Canadian television news anchors, Ontario Liberal Party candidates in Ontario provincial elections, South Korean emigrants to Canada, South Korean expatriates in Switzerland, University of Toronto alumni

Benjamin Byung Kyu Chin (born 1964), known for short as Ben Chin, is Executive Director, Communications and Issues Management in the office of B.C Premier Christy Clark, and a former Canadian political advisor in Ontario, public and private sector executive and television journalist.

==Personal life and education==

Chin was born in Geneva, Switzerland. He first came to Canada as a child from 1970 to 1974, when his father served as the South Korean Ambassador to Canada in Ottawa. After his father fell out of political favour with the South Korean government, Chin was sent to Toronto on his own to continue his education and attend junior high school. After completing high school at East York Collegiate Institute (with a brief stint living in the Washington, DC area with his parents), Chin went to the University of Toronto.  He lived with his older brother and sister, who were both students at the University of Toronto.
His brother, Jik Chin, is currently a chemistry professor at the University of Toronto.

==Career==

Chin turned to journalism, working at Citytv as a general assignment reporter and anchor from 1989 to 1997. He was best known for covering the Paul Bernardo murder trial. He then left Citytv and headed east to Halifax as Atlantic Bureau Chief for CTV News. In 1998 he returned to Toronto and joined CBC Newsworld, where he anchored The National on weekends.
In 2003, he joined then-new Toronto-based television station CKXT-TV and co-hosted the nightly evening newscast, Toronto Tonight with Sarika Sehgal.
In 2005, Chin joined the communications staff of Ontario Premier Dalton McGuinty.Ben Chin to work for McGuinty, Toronto Star, July 22, 2005.
On February 16, 2006, Chin was the Liberal Party nominee for the provincial by-election in Toronto—Danforth, held to fill the vacancy created when NDP incumbent Marilyn Churley resigned to run in the 2006 federal election."A camera-ready candidate", The Globe and Mail, February 18, 2006. Chin was defeated by his NDP opponent, Peter Tabuns, the former executive director of Greenpeace Canada and a former Toronto City Councillor for part of the riding. He did not run in the 2007 provincial elections, returning as a senior advisor in the Premier's Office, and subsequently worked on the central campaign team. After working in the private sector, Chin joined the Ontario Power Authority as Vice President of Communications and then joined AIR MILES for Social Change as Vice President, Conservation.

==References==


