[[Judy Shalom Nir-Mozes]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Israeli investors, Israeli radio personalities, Israeli television presenters, Israeli women in business, People from Ramat Gan

Judy Shalom Nir-Mozes ([tpl]lang-he|ג'ודי שלום ניר מוזס[/tpl]) is an Israeli socialite, investor, and talk show host.

==Biography==

Judy (Judith) Mozes was born in Ramat Gan to Paula and Noah Mozes, owners of the Yedioth Ahronoth newspaper, third daughter after Gilad Mozes, who was killed in a car accident in the year 1959 and Arnon Mozes, the current newspaper publisher. Her youngest sister is Tammy Mozes, who currently owns several Israeli companies.
She attended Ohel Shem and "Hadash" high schools.
In the Israel Defense Forces, she served as an accompanier to different public personalities at the Sde Dov Airport in Nortehern Tel Aviv.
In 1982 she married journalist Amiram Nir and they had two children: Nimrod and Nadav. In 1985 her father was killed in a car accident in front of the building's newspaper and ownership of the newspaper was transferred to her mother, Paula. In 1988 her husband Amiram was killed in a plane crash. Five years later, in 1993, she was remarried to MK Silvan Shalom, current Israeli senior Vice Prime Minister of Israel, with whom she had three children.
In 1994, after her mother Paula Mozes passed away, control of the newspaper was transferred to Judy's brother Arnon Mozes. Together, Judy and Arnon have gained control of the newspaper against their youngest sister Tammy, their cousins, and the chief editor of the newspaper, Dov Judkovski, after years of struggle. A few years later Tammy sold her share of the newspaper to Arnon and several other companies.
In addition to her family ascription and her family business, Judy has written for years in the weekend addition of Yedioth Ahronoth, "7 days", and hosted a TV show on channel 2, "Jude luck". Today she has a weekly radio show, on the Israeli radio station "Reshet Bet" on Fridays at 11 p.m., where she talks about current events, in the fields of politics, economy, and entertainment.
In April 2005, Nir-Mozes gave Prince Charles a gold talisman from Yitzchak Kaduri as a wedding present on the eve of his marriage to Camilla Parker Bowles. She said she had given a similar talisman to Bill Clinton during his presidency and it had helped him in his political ordeals. [tpl]Citation needed|date=November 2010[/tpl]
Judy is also a permanent panel member on the current event program, "talking about it from home". The show presents the host Emanuel Rozen live from the studio and the panel members, judy amongst them, from home.
She is well known for her effective use of social media and is one of the best-known people in Israel who use Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube.
In February 2010, she joined an investment partnership with millionaire Zaki Rakib that will focus on investments in communications, media, health, and lifestyle.Judy Shalom-Nir-Mozes, Zaki Rakib launch investment fund
On June 22, 2011, she tweeted about a rumor regarding the departure of journalist Yair Lapid to the world of politics.Judy twitted the rumour on her Twitter account
In March 2012, she supported action via Twitter to make Gaza "suffer" due to the rocket attacks against Israel.

==References==


