[[Starka]]

CATEGORIES: Polish vodkas, Lithuanian vodkas

Starka is a traditional dry vodka distilled from rye grain, currently produced only in Poland. A Starka-flavoured vodka is also produced in Lithuania. Traditional Starka is made from natural (up to 2 distillations, no rectification) rye spirit and aged in oak barrels with small addition of lime-tree and apple-tree leaves. The process of production is similar to that used in whisky. Sold in various varieties, the most notable difference between them is the length of aging period, varying from 5 to over 50 years, and the natural colour which is taken from the long reaction between alcohol and the oak, not from the addings.  

==History==

Starka was known in Poland and Lithuania at least since the 15th century, later in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, and by the 17th century became one of the favourite drinks of the szlachta and an integral part of Sarmatist culture. The tradition had it that at child's birth, the father of the house poured large amounts of home-made spirit (approximately 75% strong) into an empty oak barrel, previously used to store wine (usually imported from Hungary at that time and hence called Węgrzyn, or Hungarian). The barrel was then sealed with beeswax and dug into sandy ground, only to be dug out at the child's wedding. The name itself stems from this process of aging and in 15th century Polish meant both the vodka type and an old woman. Alternatively the name is derived[tpl]fact|date=April 2014[/tpl] from the Lithuanian word "Starkus", as production of Starka is associated[tpl]fact|date=April 2014[/tpl] with birth. 
In late 19th century various companies (mostly in Imperial Russia and Austria-Hungary) slightly simplified the production process and adopted it to the needs of mass production by the Lwów-based Baczewski company. After the end of World War I, which put an end to foreign rule over former parts of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, starka remained one of the most popular spirits in both countries. After World War II when Lithuania was inside the Soviet Union, starka production there was not stopped and was produced in "Vilniaus degtinė" and "Stumbras" (Kaunas) factories. In Poland, all of the spirit producers were nationalized, but the production of starka continued, mostly as a high-priced export good. 
Currently, Polmos Szczecin is the only company in Poland to produce Starka, and they offer it in all age classes, from 10 to 50 years old. All Starkas produced by Polmos Szczecin contain 50% alcohol by volume. There is also a 10-year-old Starka that is 80 proof (40%). The oldest Starkas offered by Polmos date back to 1947. There is also a number of other companies (most notably in Lithuania, Bulgaria, Kazakhstan, Russia and Latvia) that produce vodkas styled after the starka (produced mostly from a mixture of rectified spirit and herbal tinctures).

==External links==


