[[Falcons (film)]]

CATEGORIES: Icelandic films, 2002 films, English-language films, Icelandic-language films, Films directed by Friðrik Þór Friðriksson

Falcons (Icelandic: Fálkar ([tpl]Audio|Fálkar.ogg|pronunciation[/tpl])), is the seventh film directed by Friðrik Þór Friðriksson. This film, released in 2002, is mostly in English language and therefore this drama is considered to be a film of both domestic and international appeal.

==Plot==

It is the story of an ex con, Simon (Carradine) who after returning to Iceland, where his mother was born visit relatives, looks for the loneliest place in the world to commit suicide. In a small village he met Dúa (Vilhjálmsdóttir), an Icelandic young lady, who is found to be an interesting, rather strange woman by Simon. Dúa has a caged falcon that she hopes to tame, but they get into trouble as it is illegal to possess this kind of animal in captivity. 
In the story Simon is the embodiment of a jailed bird, one of the falcons and as she is an air sign, they join in a relationship ruled by Simon’s belief that she is his illegitimate daughter. Surrounded by tension between them, Simon serves as a protective figure to Dúa, who keeps him from committing suicide. 
The couple escape to Hamburg, Germany to start all over again. The protagonists’ behaviours are opposite to each other: Simon is down to earth and find himself awkward by Dúa’s eccentric beliefs in astrology, who considers Simon as a typical Scorpio and thus avoid deepening into a more serious relationship, partly because of the feeling of his paternity.
Dúa’s falcon, that she nourished and protected when her uncle found it with a broken wing, has a high value to her, as she considers it as the last remnant of the beloved life in Iceland. The falcon travels with them on their escape and has a high monetary value. Later, as Dúa wasted their money, Simon tries to sell the falcon in order to cover with their expenditures, but he is cheated by some crooked Germans and the falcon is stolen.

==Cast==

==Comment reviews==

Identifying the characters of the film with the characteristics of a falcon is a creative means of description, which counteract previous characterizations of bohemian Icelandic artists and American ex-cons. There is, however, a feeble argument to support the immediate and close relationship developed between the two characters.
Falcons is written in a laconic and subtle style as previous works by director Friðriksson. The film portrays an exquisite visual direction where still landscape is sometimes contrasted by subtle human activity, a resource used without falling into an exaggeration of the landscape immensity, which helps to illustrate the isolation of Simon and Dúa. The characterization of actor Keith Carradine as Simon brings a charismatic presence and strength of personality that is highlighted by talkative Dúa’s naïve and strange personality.
The soundtrack was also released as a separate CD titled Fálkar. The music composition was mainly in charge of Hilmar Örn Hilmarsson and there were featured several important artists who set up a proper atmosphere to the film’s plot.

==Credits==

Production: Icelandic Film Corporation, Peter Rommel Productions, Filmhuset AS, Norway and Film and Music Entertainment UK in association with Invicta Capital Ltd., UK & ZDF/Arte, Germany. 
Support: Eurimages, Icelandic Film Fund, Filmförderung Hamburg, and Nordic Film & TV-Fund. 
Director: Friðrik Þór Friðriksson. 
Producers: Friðrik Þór Friðriksson, Anna María Karlsdóttir, Peter Rommel, Egil Ödegaard, Mike Downey, and Sam Taylor. 
Script: Einar Kárason and Friðrik Þór Friðriksson. 
Production design: Árni Páll Jóhannsson. 
Costume Design: Helga I. Stefánsdóttir. 
Editor: Sigvaldi J. Kárason. 
Director of photography: Harald Paalgard. 
Sound Design: Kjartan Kjartansson. 
Music composed, arranged and produced by: Hilmar Örn Hilmarsson. 
Guitar: Guðlaugur Kristinn Óttarsson, Jón Þór Birgisson, Kristján Edelstein, and Orri Hardarson. 
Bass: Georg Bjarnason, and Tómas Magnús Tómasson. 
Percussion: Birgir Baldursson. 
Cello: Stefán Örn Arnarson. 
Sound Engineers: Georg Bjarnason, and Tómas Magnús Tómasson. 
Music recorded at the People’s Studio, Reykjavík. 
Re-recording: Kjartan Kjartansson, and Ingvar Lundberg. 
Sound editing: Kjartan Kjartansson, Ingvar Lundberg, Steingrímur E. Gudmundsson, Björn Viktorsson, Nicolas Liebing, Vilhjálmur, Godi Friðriksson, Nicolas Pétur Blin, and Magnús Sigurðarson. 
Foley:  Gadou Naudin. 
Foley Recording: Steingrímur E. Gudmundsson. 
Foley re-recording: Steingrímur E. Gudmundsson. 
ADR Recording: Björn Viktorsson. 
Director of “Making of”: Ari Alexander Ergis Magnússon.
Commissioning Editor ZDF/ARTE Alexander Bohr. 
Line Producer Iceland Hrönn Kristinsdóttir. 
Line Producer Germany Bernd Lübke. 
Script Consultants Kirsten Bonnén Rask, Martin Rosefeldt, Karin Laudenbach, and Sveinbjörn I. Baldvinsson. 
1st AD Hálfdán Theódórsson. 
Hair and Make up Ásta Hafﬂórsdóttir. 
Gaffer Örn Marinó Arnarson. 
2nd AC Wencke Hovet. 
Grip: Jónas Gudmundsson, and Valdimar Jóhannsson. 
Best Boy Ingvar Stefánsson. 
2nd AD Harpa Elísa Þórsdóttir, and Dadi Hrafn Sveinbjörnsson. 
Continuity María Valsdóttir. 
Electricians Arnar Einarsson, Hinrik Jónsson, and Sigurður Steinarsson. 
Sound Recordist Steingrímur E. Gudmundsson. 
Boom Operator Gudmann Þór Bjargmundsson. 
Property Master: Thorkell Hardarson. 
Assistant Property Master: Atli Geir Grétarsson. 
Asst. Production Designer: Steingrímur Þorvaldsson. 
Assistant Costume Designer: Maria Valles. 
Still Photographer: Anna Fjóla Gísladóttir. 
Crew Iceland 
Casting Iceland: María Sigurðardóttir. 
Second Unit: Hálfdán Theódórsson, and Ragnhildur Gísladóttir. 
Clapper Loader: Ómar Jabalí, and Raghildur Gísladóttir. 
SFX: Eggert Ketilsson. 
Animal Trainer: Dennis Pedersen, and Dog Steam Tours. 
Runners: Árni Fannar Sigurðsson, and Lilja Jónsdóttir. 
Carpenters:Jóhannes Karlsson, and Haukur Karlsson. 
Drivers: Alf  Wardrum, and Jón Eldjárn. 
Catering: Ásta Búadóttir. 
Crew Germany: 
Production Co-ordinator: Susanne Steube. 
Location Managers: Cord Lappe, and Tobias Hering. 
Casting: Eva Schäfer. 
2nd AD: Natascha Oyda. 
3rd AD: Jan Erik Stahl. 
Clapper Loader: Timo Schwarz. 
Animal Trainer Filmtierschule, Tatjana Zimek & Mike Bauer. 
SFX: Tricky Fingers, and Uli Lange Paroll. 
Props Buyer: Till Franzen. 
Assistant Costume: Astrid Pinckernelle. 
Stunt co-ordination: Pahuyuth Stunts. 
Catering: Tischlein deck dich! and Isgard Kavugcuoglou.
Icelandic Production Office: 
Production Co-ordination: Arna M. Gunnarsdóttir, Birna Gunnarsdóttir, and Sigrún Erla Sigurðardóttir. 
Finance Manager: Helgi Már Bjarnason. 
Accountant Sigurður Bjarnason. 
German Production office: 
Post-production Manager: Rona Unrau. 
Accountant: Rolf Merkle.
UK Production Office: 
Producer’s Assistant: Kate Barry. 
Development Executive: Sam Lavender. 
Auditors: Malde & Co., Ashish Shah and Sirish Malde. 
Legal Services: Lee and Thompson Solicitors. 
Insurance: Aon Ruben.
Norwegian Production office: 
Producer’s Assistant: Pauline Aasarod. 
Sound Studio: Cinemasound ltd. 
Laboratory: Atlantik Film Kopierwerk GmbH, Hamburg, Film Stock, and Kodak. 
Camera Equipment: Maddels Cameras GmbH/Hamburg. 
Legal Services: Tómas Þorvaldsson. 
Insurance: Sjóvá Almennar.
Acknowledgements: Bifreiðar og landbúnaðarvélar, Landsbanki Íslands, Gunnar Carlsson, Jim Stark, Leikfélag Siglufjardar, Lögreglan Sauðárkróki, Íbúar og bæjarstjórn Siglufjarðar, Íbúar Hofsóss, Íbúar Sauðárkróks, Sýslumannsembættið á Keflavíkurflugvelli, Jón Magnússon, Eigendur Þönglaskála, Heimilisfólkið Vogum - Hofsósi, Ásmundur Jónsson, The crew of Maddel Neumann, KuppelFilm GbR, Location & Team-Service Germany, Astron Hotel (staff), Marten Cassens, Kai Imelmann, Noah Matheis, Samo Matheis, Tina Mersmann, Elmar Podlasly, 500 Space Bars: K. Gaiser GmbH  (++ LOGO), Hiltronic/Statronic, Hamburgische Schiffszimmerergenossenschaft, HHLA, Herr Hoppe, Hotel Rex, Location office Filmförderung Hamburg, M+V Gaststätte.

==See also==

==External links==


