[[Abdul Hamid Halim of Kedah]]

CATEGORIES: 1863 births, 1943 deaths, Honorary Knights Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George, Monarchs of Kedah, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the White Elephant, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown of Thailand, Knights Grand Cordon of the Order of Chula Chom Klao

Sultan Abdul Hamid Halim Shah or 'Sultan Sir Abdu'l Hamid Halim Shah II ibni Ahmad Taj ud-din al-Mukarram Shah [tpl]Abbr|KCMG|Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George[/tpl], (4 June 1864 – 13 May 1943) was the 25th Sultan of Kedah. He reigned from 1881 to 1943. He was the son of Sultan Ahmad Tajuddin Mukarram Shah and Wan Hajar.
During his reign, the Sultan had asked for a $2,500,000 loan from Siam during a state financial crisis in 1905. The loan was extended with the proviso that a Financial Advisor from the court of Siam be accepted and a State Council be created to assist the Sultan in the administration of all public affairs. This resulted in the promulgation of a new constitution on 29 July 1905. The state council were run by his brothers followed by their sons. The formation of the State Council thus curbed the Sultan's administrative powers.
The Sultan had several wives and partners; Che Manjelara, Che Sofiah, Sharifah Fatimah Binti Syed Idrus, Sharifah Seha Binti Syed Hussein, Che Spachendra, Sharifah Mariam and Che Laraseh. The Sultan's seventh son and twentieth child with Makche Manjelara, Tunku Abdul Rahman, who would later became the first Prime Minister of Malaysia.
He was succeeded by Sultan Badlishah.

==Landmarks==

Sultan Abdul Hamid was responsible for the refurbishing of the Balai Besar in 1896. This building was destroyed due to attacks by the Bugis armada (1770) and Siamese (1821). The refurbishment was spearheaded by Muhammad bin Lebai Tambi, an architect with the Public Works Department of Kedah State. The wedding ceremony of the Sultan's five princes and princesses was held here in 1904 and the celebrations were carried out over a 90 day period. Besides the wedding ceremony, the Balai Besar was also used for installation ceremonies, and State Council Conferences from 1905 until 1973.
Sultan Abdul Hamid also built a new building for the Balai Nobat using concrete and metal in 1906. The architecture is the same as the previous wooden building. The height was three-story and the dome at its apex represents the Islamic element such as those found on mosques.
It was during Sultan Abdul Hamid's reign that Masjid Zahir was officially opened on Friday, 15 October 1915. The Sultan also led the Friday prayers on the auspicious day. The architecture of the mosque was inspired by the Azizi Mosque The image of Azizi Mosque can be asses here. in Tanjung Pura, Langkat Sultanate (present-day North Sumatra). This mosque is enhanced with five prime large domes symbolizing the Five Pillars of Islam.

==Honours==

==References==

==External links==


