[[Houston Baptist University]]

CATEGORIES: Houston Baptist University, Universities and colleges affiliated with the Baptist General Convention of Texas, Universities and colleges affiliated with the Southern Baptist Convention, Universities and colleges in Houston, Texas, Educational institutions established in 1960, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, Universities and colleges accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, 1960 establishments in Texas

Houston Baptist University (commonly abbreviated HBU) is a private Baptist institution founded in 1960. It is located in Greater Sharpstown in Houston, Texas near the Southwest Freeway."Districts." Greater Sharpstown Management District. Retrieved on August 15, 2009.Rodriguez, Lori. "Opinions vary over naming the growing Asian community on Houston's southwest side." (Archive). Alternate version without Chinatown map: "DIVERSITY DEBATE / Chinatown outgrowing name / Opinions vary over naming the growing Asian community on Houston's southwest side." Houston Chronicle. Wednesday May 9, 2007. A1.

==History==

Houston Baptist College was created by action of the Baptist General Convention of Texas on November 15, 1960 culminating many years of work and study. The aim of the College founders was the establishment of a Christian college of the highest order in the city of Houston that stressed quality of life as well as quality of learning.
In 1952, the Union Baptist Association authorized a committee to study the possibility of locating a Baptist college in Houston. With the assistance and encouragement of the Education Commission of the Baptist General Convention of Texas, the committee conducted a survey in 1955. Acting upon information obtained with the endorsement of the Education Commission, the Association approved the concept of establishing a new college. In 1956, the Executive Board of the Baptist General Convention of Texas approved a recommendation that Houston Baptists be given assurance that the Convention would support such a college when the College Committee of the Union Baptist Association had succeeded in acquiring both (1) a satisfactory site for a campus of at least one hundred acres, and (2) a minimum corpus of at least three million dollars. Of this sum, one and one-half million dollars would constitute a nucleus endowment fund; one and one-half million dollars would be designated for a physical plant. The Union Baptist Association accepted these conditions and endorsed the requirements set up by the state Baptist convention.
In 1957, a Houston land developer, Frank Sharp, offered to sell Union Baptist Association [tpl]convert|390|acre|km2[/tpl] in southwest Houston for the construction of a college. The Board of Governors of Rice University agreed to lend most of the money needed with the land as collateral. To complete the funding, twenty-five business men, since called "founders", pledged to be responsible for $10,000 each. Therefore, by 1958, a campus site of [tpl]convert|196|acre|km2[/tpl] was acquired in southwest Houston, and, in 1960, the initial financial goal of repaying the loan was reached as a result of a campaign among the churches. Much of the land was used to build for-profit housing, much of which included the development that will later become the seeds for the Sharpstown community, and the Memorial-Hermann Southwest hospital, land that is still property of HBU.
In 1960, the Baptist General Convention of Texas in its annual session at Lubbock, Texas elected the first Board of Trustees. This board in session in Houston, Texas on November 15, 1960 approved and signed the College charter. The next day, this charter was ratified and recorded with the Secretary of State in Austin. The way was then cleared to select administrative officers, develop a suitable physical plant, and design an appropriate academic program. Dr. W. H. Hinton began service as the first President of the College on July 1, 1962.
The College opened in September 1963 with a freshman class of 193 students, a cluster of new buildings, and a teaching staff of thirty faculty. A new class was added each year until the College attained a four-year program in 1966-67. By then, the full- time faculty had grown to fifty-four members, serving an enrollment of approximately nine hundred undergraduate students. Among the faculty was the historian Marilyn McAdams Sibley, who received her Ph.D. from Rice University.[tpl]cite web|url=http://itemonline.com/obituaries/x212525826/Dr-Marilyn-McAdams-Sibley/print|title=Marilyn McAdams Sibley|publisher=Huntsville Item online|accessdate=September 23, 2010[/tpl]
A history of the University's first fifty years was published in 2010.  "An Act of Providence: Houston Baptist University 1960-2010," written by Vice President Emeritus Dr. Don Looser, was awarded the Institutional History Award in 2011.
In 2012 the university administration considered enacting a name change, arguing that the current name distances the school from some prospective students.Rhor, Monica and Joseph Duarte. "Houston Baptist University explores name change." Houston Chronicle. Tuesday March 27, 2012. Retrieved on March 27, 2012. According to those proposing alternative names—such as "Morris Christian University -- the term "Baptist" might act as a barrier to seeking students from non-Baptist Christian sects and the term "Houston" might be a barrier to a nationwide audience.

==Academics==

A wide variety of undergraduate majors are offered and pre-professional programs range from Biblical Languages to Nursing.  All classes are faculty-taught and more than half the classes have fewer than 20 students.  HBU also offers graduate programs in business, Christian counseling, psychology, the liberal arts, visual arts, and education.

==Campus housing==

The Reuben & Rebecca Bates Philips Residence Colleges for Men and Women are two separate residence hall facilities, with each serving one gender."Residence Colleges", Houston Baptist University
The Lakehouse is the largest single residential building on campus that houses  both genders on opposing sides of the building. 
Husky Village, seven apartment buildings with various layouts, are usually reserved for the university and house mostly upper classmen and staff.

==Community Life + Worship==

80 Community Life + Worship Credits (CLW Credits) are required for graduation from HBU. Up to 20  may be earned per semester. Transfer students are also alloted 0.75 CLW Credits for each credit hour transferred into the university. CLW Credits may be accrued from a variety of opportunities including but not limited to: campus service, a weekly traditional chapel service known as Convocation, a weekly student-led contemporary worship service known as Quest, small group Bible studies, lecture series and through the ACTS (Assisting Communities Through Students) office which coordinates community service and volunteer work in the Houston community. The on-campus "Community Life and Worship" biyearly magazine lists the different opportunities through which students may earn CLW Credits. The spiritual life office also awards Credits for students who participate in church or university sponsored mission trips. Read more about HBU's CLW program.

==Athletics==

Houston Baptist is a member of the Southland Conference.  They joined the league in 2013.  From 2008-2013, Houston Baptist competed as a member of the Great West Conference.  The Great West, previously a football only conference, expanded on July 10, 2008 to become an all-sports conference.  HBU accepted an invitation to join the newly expanded conference along with NJIT, North Dakota, South Dakota, Texas-Pan American and Utah Valley.
HBU, which was a member of NCAA Division I until moving to the NAIA in 1989, began its transition back to Division I in 2007-08. The Huskies field teams in 16 sports.
MEN: Basketball, Baseball, Football, Soccer, Indoor Track and Field, Outdoor Track and Field, Cross-Country, Golf
WOMEN: Basketball, Softball, Volleyball, Soccer, Indoor Track and Field, Outdoor Track and Field, Cross Country, Golf
In 2009, HBU's Daniel Martinez beat Luis Nava of Texas Pan-American over the final 400 meters to win the Great West Cross Country Championships, the first men's league title awarded by the new conference.
The athletics department boasts an 80% graduation rate among its student-athletes.
Notable NCAA D-1 Athletic Achievements: 
Notable NAIA Athletic Achievements:

==List of notable clubs and activities==

==Notable Alumni==

==References==

  6. Looser, Donald William. "An Act of Providence: A History of Houston Baptist 
     University 1960-2010." Pearland, Halcyon Press, Ltd., 2010.

==External links==

Official University websites:

