[[Cloak of Deception]]

CATEGORIES: Books based on Star Wars, 2002 novels, Prequel novels, Del Rey books

Cloak of Deception is a 2002 novel set in the Star Wars galaxy. It is a prequel novel occurring before the events of Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace. The book was written by James Luceno. The cover art was by Steven Anderson. The book takes place 32.5 years before Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.
Narration for the audio version was performed by Alexander Adams. The paperback version included a 15-page excerpt of Enemy Lines I: Rebel Dream.

==Synopsis==

The Galactic Republic is in a state of decline, mired in greed and corruption and tangled in bureaucracy. In the outlying systems, where the Trade Federation maintains a stranglehold on shipping routes, tensions are boiling over—while back in the comfort of Coruscant, the hub of civilized space and seat of Republic government, few senators seem inclined to investigate the problem. And those who suspect Supreme Chancellor Valorum of having a hand in the machinations are baffled—especially when Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi foil an assassination attempt on the Chancellor.
With the crisis escalating, Valorum calls for an emergency trade summit. As humans and aliens gather, conspiracies sealed with large sums of money run rampant, and no one is entirely above suspicion. But the greatest threat of all remains unknown to everyone except three members of the Trade Federation, who have entered into a shadowy alliance with the Sith lord Darth Sidious. While Valorum, Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan will be content with more money and fewer problems, Sidious has grander, far more terrifying plans.

==Writing==

While writing the novel, Luceno was granted access to parts of the screenplay drafts and concept art of Star Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones. As such, Cloak of Deception marked the first appearance in the series' chronological timeline of almost all of the new characters from Attack of the Clones, including the Techno Union, Passel Argente, and other Separatists.
At the end of chapter 29 the word 'thought' is missing the 't' at the end. In chapter 33, the word 'a' is incorrectly written as 'an'.

===Opening crawl===

The back cover of the book features an opening crawl similar to those at the beginning of the Star Wars films:

==External links==


