[[Kharoti]]

CATEGORIES: Ghilzai Pashtun tribes

Kharoti (Pashto: خروټی)  is a Pashtun tribe of Ghilzai origin. The Kharoti, like other Ghilzais, have a reputation for fierce independence and resistance to outside governance in any form. Many of the Kharoti are or were Kuchis. They have an estimated population of about 5.5 million, making it one of, if not the largest tribes in Afghanistan.
The Kharoti are one of Afghanistan's largest and most widespread tribes, with significant territory throughout eastern and south-eastern Afghanistan. However, their traditional heartland is in Loya Paktia and specifically in the territory of Paktika province. There are major Kharoti populations in the Paktika districts of Urgun, Barmal, Sar Hawza, Zarghun Shahr, Omna, Surobi and Gomal where they are accompanied primarily by the Sulaimankhel, Wazir and Zadran tribes.Paktika Personalities: An Examination of the Tribes and the Significant People of a Traditional Pashtun Province - Timothy S. Timmons and Rashid Hassanpoor (2007) The Kharoti also have a strong presence in Ghazni, Zabul, Paktia, Khost, Logar, Wardak, Kabul and Nangarhar.
Their tribal rivals are the Wazirs, Sulaimankhel and Furmalis, both of whom believe the Furmali area belongs to them. Despite having a common Ghilzai origin, the much larger and more powerful Suleimankhel super-tribe are the Kharotis' traditional rivals.  
The majority of Kharoti tribesmen are associated with businesses in overseas countries in Europe, America, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates and in Karachi, Pakistan where they have carpets and fabrics businesses. 
The Kharoti tribe is one of first Pashtun tribes to have their own organizations in Pakistan. There are two such NGO's, The Kharoti Committee, led by Haji Juma Gul Khan, which helps the poor in Sar Hawza, Paktika and the Kharoti Welfare Association, led by Haji Ameer Gul. 
The most prominent figures of the Kharoti tribe include Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, Farhad Darya, Gholam Serwar Nasher, Rahman Kharoti, Ustad Sayaf, Loy Sher Khan Bander and the late Mir Ahmad Khan Qader.
Since April the 2nd, 2011, Naqibullah Shorish has been chosen by the elders as the main leader of the Kharoti tribe in all parts of Afghanistan. Naqibullah Shorish was already an elder of the Kharoti community of the district Khaki Jabbar in the Kabul Province. He lived in Germany for more than 20 years, before deciding to return to Afghanistan in 2008. He is also one of the main members of the Afghan Peace Jirga, who's main purpose is to support negotiations between the Taliban, NATO and the Afghan government.
The Nasher Clan of the Kharoti tribe is based in the Konduz Province in Northern Afghanistan, where they were exiled by the ruling Abdali/Durrani tribes.

==Notable people==

( Bayazid Khan Kharoti
(Ahmad khan kharoti)

==References==


