[[Jason Keng-Kwin Chan]]

CATEGORIES: 1971 births, Living people, Malaysian Chinese people, Australian people of Chinese descent

Jason Keng-Kwin Chan (born December 1, 1971) starred on Power Rangers Ninja Storm in 2003 as Cameron Watanabe, the Green Samurai Ranger. He was born in Malaysia and moved to Perth with his family when he was only 5. He entered medical school at the University of Western Australia, but Jason continued to pursue the creative arts, studying ballet, contemporary dance, and jazz dance at the Western Australian Academy of Performing Arts. After graduating, he obtained his Fellowship in General Practice and worked as a General Practitioner for a few years before gaining a place in the renowned National Institute of Dramatic Art (NIDA) in Sydney (other graduates include: Mel Gibson, Cate Blanchett, Judy Davis, Baz Luhrmann and Hugo Weaving) where he obtained a Bachelor of Dramatic Arts in Acting.

==Television==

Soon after graduating from drama school he appeared as a host on Disney Channel's Playhouse Disney which aired throughout Australasia. He then garnered a role as the Green Samurai Ranger in the American TV series: Power Rangers Ninja Storm. In Singapore he has appeared in many Mediacorp Channel 5 and Art Central productions including: My Sassy Neighbour where he plays the character Mr. Watanabe (which is coincidentally the last name of the character he played in Power Rangers Ninja Storm), Six Weeks, Parental Guidance, 9 Lives, Mental, The Secret Lives of Sorry Stars and the telemovie: House of Harmony playing opposite Maggie Q as her husband Michael Lee. In Australia he played opposite Jaqueline Macqenzie in Two Twisted, a Bryan Brown TV series.

==Theatre==

His theatre credits include: "Chris" in The Admiral's Odyssey, "Clifford Bradshaw" in Cabaret and "Lysander" in A Midsummer Night's Dream. He played the role of Lysander in a false leg after he suffered a complete tear of his achilles tendon during rehearsals.

==Film==

His feature film credits include: the animated feature Sing to the Dawn. where he plays the villain (release late 2008), and The Leap Years in which he plays the role of "Raymond" alongside Ananda Everingham and Wong Li-Lin. He appeared briefly in Candy, an Australian film, as Heath Ledger's doctor and very briefly in "Stealth" as one of the technicians.
Recently he completed shooting a German tele-movie: Love in the Lion City. He played the romantic lead opposite German actress: Lara Joy Korner. Also, he has recently replaced Adrian Pang as the host of the International Emmy nominated show The Arena.

==External links==


