[[Benjamin Hutto]]

CATEGORIES: American conductors (music), Living people, 1947 births, People from Charleston, South Carolina, Emory University alumni, Westminster Choir College alumni, Sewanee: The University of the South alumni

Benjamin Hutto is an American musician who has specialized in writing, producing and directing choral music. He is currently (2014) Director of Choral Activities at St. Albans School for Boys, and National Cathedral School for Girls in Washington DC.  He is also Director of Music and Organist at St. John's Episcopal Church, Lafayette Square.

==Biography==

Hutto was born in Charleston, South Carolina in 1947. He received a Bachelor of Arts degree (English) from Emory, then studied at Westminster Choir College, and at the Royal School of Church Music in England. In 1989 he completed the Education for Ministry Program at the School of Theology through the University of the South. In 1998, he was named a Fellow of the Royal School of Church Music. In 2013, he was awarded the degree of Doctor of Humane Letters (honoris causa) from Virginia Theological Seminary.
He served as President of the Association of Anglican Musicians (1988-1989) and the Royal School of Church Music in America (1999-2006). He served as instructor and director of choral music at the Porter-Gaud School (Charleston) from 1969-1985.  Simultaneously, he was Organist and Choirmaster at the (Episcopal) Cathedral of St. Luke and St. Paul.  He was a co-founder of the organ recital series for Piccolo Spoleto, part of the Spoleto Festival USA.  From 1985-1999, he was Organist and Choirmaster at Christ Church (Episcopal) in Charlotte.  Since 1999, he has been Director of Choral Activities and Director of Performing Arts at St. Albans School for Boys and National Cathedral School for Girls in Washington, DC.  Since 2009, he has also served as Director of Music Ministry and Organist at historic St. John's Church, Lafayette Square, in Washington, the "Church of the Presidents."  He has served as Dean of both the Charleston (SC) and the Charlotte (NC) Chapters of the American Guild of Organists.
As a choral conductor, Hutto has presented children’s choir workshops and served on panels for regional and national conferences for numerous professional educational and music organizations.  During his time in Washington, his school choirs and young singers have appeared on National Public Radio, with the Cathedral Choral Society, Choral Arts, the Washington Master Chorale, and the Juilliard Orchestra, at performances in the Kennedy Center, and on national television.  His singers have toured from coast to coast in the United States and internationally to Australia, South Africa, Chile and Argentina.  He has conducted workshops and summer courses for the Royal School of Church Music in many parts of the United States, as well as in Canada, the United Kingdom, Ireland, and South Africa.
Hutto holds memberships in Sigma Chi social fraternity, Omicron Delta Kappa university leadership society, the American Guild of Organists, the Association of Anglican Musicians, the Royal School of Church Music, and the Cosmos Club.
Hutto has written several Anglican chants for The Hymnal 1982 and has several published anthems.

==Honors and positions==

Hutto is a past-president of the Royal School of Church Music in North America. He is the Director of Performing Arts at St. Albans School and National Cathedral School, and Director of Music Ministry and Organist at St. John's Church, Lafayette Square. He was named a Fellow of the Royal School of Church Music in 1998, and awarded the degree of Doctor of Humane Letters (honoris causa) by Virginia Theological Seminary in 2013.  He composed a number of works which have been included in the 1982 Hymnal of the Episcopal Church, and he has several published anthems.

==External links==


