[[Ryan Gregorio]]

CATEGORIES: Filipino basketball players, Philippine Basketball Association coaches, Filipino basketball coaches, Sports commentators, 1972 births, Living people, University of the Philippines Diliman, Philippine Basketball Association broadcasters

Paul Ryan C. Gregorio (born April 7, 1972) is a Filipino professional basketball head coach of the Meralco Bolts in the Philippine Basketball Association. He began his PBA head coaching job with the Purefoods TJ Giants in 2002 on an acting capacity and won his first PBA Championship on the same year at the age of 29. He was also a former player ('92, '93, '94) and coach (2001) of the U.P. Fighting Maroons in the UAAP, before coaching in the pro league. He is a three-time PBA Champion Coach, a 4-time PBA All-Star Coach and a three-time PBA Coach of the Year awardee. He and Chot Reyes are the only distinguished PBA coaches who won at least 3 COY accolades. He is also the first and only coach in the league history to win a championship as an interim coach in 2002. Gregorio is a graduate of the University of the Philippines with the degree of Bachelor of Arts in Communication, Major in Film and Audio-Visual Communication (Batch 1994).

==Career==

Prior to his head coaching chores with Purefoods, Gregorio was an assistant coach and video coordinator of Eric Altamirano with Purefoods in1997..
However, in 2002, Altamirano was hired as an assistant coach for the Philippine National Basketball Team, and Gregorio was named as the interim coach of the TJ Hotdogs. Under Gregorio's hands, Purefoods won the 2002 Governor's Cup with a 4-3 series victory over the Alaska Aces. The team was led by imports Derrick Brown, Kelvin Price and Best Player of the Conference winner Rey Evangelista. Gregorio coached the team to a dismal performance in the Commissioner's Cup before Altamirano regained coaching duties in the All-Filipino Cup. Despite this, Gregorio was rewarded, along with then-Coca-Cola Tigers mentor Chot Reyes as co-winner of the PBA Press Corps Coach of the Year Award.
In 2003, Gregorio became the full-time head coach of Purefoods, after Altamirano was tasked to head the San Miguel All-Stars team.

==2004-05 Re-Building the Giants==

In the 2004-05 season, Gregorio coached the Purefoods team, retooled with amateur stars James Yap, Paul Artadi, Peter June Simon and the vastly improved Kerby Raymundo. Despite Purefoods' sorry stint in the 2004 Fiesta Conference, the team went on to finish two quarterfinals' stints in the Philippine Cup and the 2005 Fiesta Conference.

==2005-06 Championship Run==

The 2005-06 PBA season would be Gregorio's finest season yet, he would lead the Purefoods Chunkee Giants to two finals appearances, a runner-up finish in the 2005-06 Fiesta Conference, and a championship against Red Bull in the Philippine Cup Finals, winning in 6 games, 4-2. Prior to the finals meeting with Red Bull, he would bring his team back to life after being down 1 - 3 in the Semi-Finals vs. Alaska. The series victory vs. Alaska would be remembered as one of the best comebacks in the PBA history. He once again coached his team to its second championship in the last four years. The 2006 success earned him his second Coach of the Year Award

==2007-08 All-Filipino Finals Appearance==

Gregorio started the 2007-2008 season with a bang. He led his team to a 5-game sweep of the pre-tournament games and would eventually bag the Pre-Tournament Championship. He would continue his mastery of the All-Filipino Conference as he led his team to a 7-0 start and finished with 12 wins and 6 losses, enough to push the team to the Semi-Finals. He would lead his team to another trip to the Finals, his third. However, his team would eventually lose to Sta. Lucia in 7 games via a controversial series.

==2008-09 Skid==

The 2008-09 PBA season became one of Gregorio's worst seasons. Starting center Rommel Adducul was diagnosed with throat cancer and forced Purefoods TJ Giants to trade key player Marc Pingris to San Miguel Beermen for big man Enrico Villanueva. This signaled a major revamp with Gregorio's team lineup and a losing season finishing with only 15 in 32 elimination round games. He only managed to stir his team through the wildcard in both conferences. His team would end both tournaments in controversies, a bottle-throwing incident between his player James Yap against assistant coach Koy Banal and the benching of reinforcement Marquin Chandler on separate do-or-die games the TJ Giants consequently lost.

==2009-10: Farewell Season with Purefoods Franchise==

Gregorio guided his team in the 2009-10 PBA season to a record 41 wins. James Yap would earn his 2nd season MVP award. With the return of old reliables Marc Pingris, Paul Artadi together with veteran center Rafi Reavis, and rookie standout Rico Maierhofer, his team would finish as champions in the 2009–10 PBA Philippine Cup Finals defeating the Alaska Aces 4 - 0. The sweep is the first time in the history of the All-Filipino Conference
This however marked the end of Gregorio's era as Llamados coach with his transfer to Meralco Bolts. He would eventually become the franchise's winningest and longest-tenured head coach with 3 championships in 8 seasons as Purefoods/B-Meg coach. 
Timeline with Purefoods:  
1997 - Champion  - All-Filipino Cup (Assistant Coach) 
1997 - Runner-Up - Governor's Cup (Assistant Coach) 
2002 - Champion  - All-Filipino Cup (Interim Head Coach) 
2006 - Runner-Up - Fiesta Conference (Head Coach) 
2006 - Champion  - All-Filipino Cup (Head Coach) 
2008 - Runner-Up - All-Filipino Cup (Head Coach) 
2010 - Champion  - All-Filipino Cup (Head Coach)
Gregorio was succeeded by his assistant and multi-titled Philippine Basketball League coach Jorge Gallent

==2010-present: Meralco Bolts Head Coach / Assistant Vice-President and Head of Meralco Sports and Youth Advocacy==

In August 2010, Gregorio left B-Meg Derby Ace Llamados and signed a coaching deal with the Philippine Basketball Association returnee Manila Electric Company (Meralco Bolts). He is also concurrently part of Meralco’s corporate staff as Assistant Vice President and Head of Meralco Sports and Youth Advocacy.

==4 -Time PBA All-Star Coach==

2006 - Head Coach North All-Stars (Won) ; Laoag City 
2008 - Head Coach North All-Stars (Lost)  ; Bacolod City 
2010 - Head Coach North All-Stars (Won) ; Puerto Princesa City 
2012 - Head Coach Veterans (Won) ; Laoag City

==3 - Time PBA Coach of the Year==

2002 - Co-Winner (PBA Press Corps Coach of the Year) with Chot Reyes 
2006 - Winner (PBA Press Corps Coach of the Year) 
2010 - Winner (PBA Press Corps Coach of the Year)

==Personal life==

Aside from coaching and doing sports broadcasts, Gregorio enjoys spending quality time with his family. A son of UP System Vice President for Administration Martin Gregorio and science specialist Lucille Gregorio, he is married to Jin Salgado-Gregorio and has 2 children, Ysabelle Marie Brianna and Ramon Jose.

==External links==


