[[Kenilworth Public Schools]]

CATEGORIES: New Jersey District Factor Group DE, School districts in Union County, New Jersey

File:KenilworthSchools.png

The Kenilworth Public Schools are a comprehensive community public school district that serves students in Pre-Kindergarten through twelfth grade from the borough of Kenilworth, in Union County, New Jersey, United States.
The district participates in the Interdistrict Public School Choice Program at David Brearley High School, having been approved on November 2, 1999, as one of the first ten districts statewide to participate in the program.Interdistrict Public School Choice Program: Approved Choice Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed June 19, 2008. Seats in the program for non-resident students are specified by the district and are allocated by lottery, with tuition paid for participating students by the New Jersey Department of Education.Interdistrict Public School Choice Program: Introduction, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed June 19, 2008. Each school year, slos are made available by grade and a lottery is used to select attendees if there are more applicants than available slots. Prospective Choice participants must be residents of Union County eligible for placement in grades 7-10 who were enrolled in a public school during the full year prior to entry to the Kenilworth Public Schools.
Public school students from Kenilworth attend David Brearley High School, as well as from Winfield Township, who attend as part of a sending/receiving relationship with the Winfield Township School District.David Brearly High School 2011 School Report Card, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed May 17, 2013. "David Brearley Middle/High School is home to students in grades 7-12 from Kenilworth, and has a send-receive relationship for approximately fifty high school students from Winfield Township."
As of the 2010-11 school year, the district's two schools had an enrollment of 1,258 students and 106.3 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 11.83:1.District information for the Kenilworth School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed May 17, 2013.
The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "DE", the fifth highest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed October 27, 2009.

==Schools==

Schools in the district (with 2008-09 enrollment data from the National Center for Education StatisticsData for the Kenilworth Public Schools, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed May 17, 2013.) are:New Jersey School Directory for the Kenilworth Public Schools, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed May 17, 2013.

==Administration==

Core members of the district's administration are:Board of Education, Kenilworth Schools. Accessed April 22, 2011.New Jersey School Directory, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed May 17, 2013.

==References==

==External links==


