[[The Elephant Show]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 Canadian television series debuts, 1988 Canadian television series endings, Canadian children's television series, CBC network shows, TVOntario shows, YTV shows, Nick Jr. shows, Fictional elephants, Television series produced in Toronto

The Elephant Show (from the second season onward, Sharon, Lois & Bram's Elephant Show) is a Canadian children's television show. It originally ran on CBC from 1984 until 1988.

==Summary==

The Elephant Show features the adventures of the Canadian singing trio Sharon, Lois & Bram and Elephant (Paula Gallivan in an elephant costume). Elephant doesn't speak, but is voiced by a tuba (played by Scott Irvine), which conveys thoughts and mood by its pitch and inflection. The four are usually accompanied by a group of children and a sidekick, Eric Nagler.
Every week Sharon, Lois & Bram along with celebrated family entertainer, Eric Nagler are joined by the curious and fun-loving antics of their pachyderm pal Elephant and such renowned guest artists as: Toller Cranston, Louis Del Grande, Jayne Eastwood, Murray McLauchlan, Chuck Mangione, Andrea Martin, The Nylons and Jan Rubes.
Almost every episode contains a concert segment, featuring Sharon, Lois & Bram and Eric and the Mammoth Band. They sing songs and help children with their problems (including arguments, fear and the failure of plans). In most episodes, the group travels to a new location (such as a zoo, hospital, or museum). They occasionally stay home and have an adventure in their yard (like building a tree fort and encountering a grumpy neighbour). The show occasionally includes a social lesson (such as a pro-UNICEF discussion). Sharon, Lois and Bram appeared in advertisements during the show's original run, encouraging parents to vaccinate their children against polio, rubella and mumps. Each episode concludes with the song Skinnamarink.
The show enjoyed top ratings in Canada and had consistently been rated one of the top three programs on Nickelodeon in the United States. In 1993 a panel of experts at TV. Guide rated the Elephant Show the #2 program for preschooler in North America.
In the years following the final season of Sharon, Lois & Bram’s Elephant Show, the show remained on Nickelodeon until it was pushed off the lineup in 1996. During its run on the American pay-TV channel, it ranked #2 on TV Guide’s Top 10 of Children’s Programs, beating Sesame Street (#5) and Barney & Friends (#9). By the time the final rerun had aired, The Elephant Show had aired 65 episodes in five seasons and had been viewed in Canada, the United States, Ireland, Australia, Japan, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Singapore, Greece, South Africa and Great Britain, reaching over 100 million viewers.
The series was broadcast in the United States on Nickelodeon, from September 21, 1987 to October 21, 1995.
After the series ended, Eric Nagler starred in his own series, Eric's World, produced by The Elephant Show's producer, Cambium Productions.

==Episodes==

==Credits==

==External links==


