[[Dhirendranath Datta]]

CATEGORIES: 1886 births, 1971 deaths, Bangladeshi Hindus, Bengali-language activists, Pakistani Hindus, Pakistani politicians, Surendranath College alumni, University of Calcutta alumni, People from Comilla District, People killed in the Bangladesh Liberation War, Assassinated Bangladeshi politicians, Relief workers in Noakhali, Recipients of the Independence Day Award (Bangladesh), Pakistani torture victims

Dhirendranath Datta ([tpl]lang-bn|ধীরেন্দ্রনাথ দত্ত[/tpl] Dhirendronath Dôtto) (1886–1971) was a Bengali lawyer by profession who was also active in the politics of undivided Bengal in pre-partition India, and later in East Pakistan (1947–1971). He was born on November 2, 1886 in Ramrail, in Brahmanbaria District,[ref]
</ref>
Bengal Province (in today's Bangladesh).

==Early life==

His father Jagabandhu Datta was a lawyer, and introduced Dhirendranath to the legal profession from an early age. Dhirendranath was educated at Nabinagar High School, Comilla Zilla School and Ripon College in Calcutta.

==Early career==

Dhirendranath Datta began his career as a school teacher, eventually becoming an Assistant Headmaster of the Bangura Highschool in Comilla. He was highly active in the local community, and was a leader of the relief effort following devastating floods in 1915. He formed the Mukti Sangha, a welfare organization, after becoming inspired by Mahatma Gandhi. His work in relief continued up to the Bengal Famine of 1943.  Dhirendranath joined the Comilla District Bar in 1911, and continued to practice up until he was advised to give up his profession in favor of politics by his political comrade Chittaranjan Das.

==Political activism==

Along with many politically active Bengalis of his time, Dhirendranath took a firm stand following the Bengal Partition of 1905. He chose to oppose the partition, working closely with other anti-partition activists such as Surendranath Banerjee and Rabindranath Tagore. He joined the Indian National Congress from Mymensingh District and was first elected to the Bengal Legislative Council in 1937. He was arrested by the British rulers of India for his participation in the Quit India movement of 1942.
While he firmly opposed the creation of Pakistan and partition of India on religious lines, when it became clear that partition of Bengal was inevitable and that his home district of Comilla was to fall in the new Muslim majority state, unlike many other Hindu leaders, Dhirendranath firmly opted to remain in East Bengal, and as a result, was invited to be part of the constitutional committee that started meeting before the actual independence of Pakistan, to draft the legislative framework of the new country.

==The Pakistan era==

Dhirendranath continued to represent his constituency as a member of the renamed Pakistan National Congress as a Hindu member (seats were allocated by a quota according to religion). On February 23, 1948 in the Pakistan Constituent Assembly in Karachi, Dhirendranath made a speech calling for Bengali to be made one of the official languages of Pakistan, in what was to become the action he will be most remembered for by his compatriots.
He continued to be a thorn in Pakistan establishment; in 1954, he moved an adjournment motion against the declaration of Governor's Rule in East Pakistan, and was seen as the de facto face of protest and democracy.
He served as the Minister of Health and Social Welfare (East Pakistan) in Ataur Rahman Khan's cabinet (1956–58).
He was placed under house arrest during the 1965 India-Pakistan War and declared a security threat, primarily because of his Hindu faith and because of his alleged links to the emerging underground Bengali Nationalist movement, supposed members of which included Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. After this, he refrained from active politics but kept on supporting the rising nationalist movement from behind.

==Assassination by the Pakistan Army==

The Pakistan establishment never forgot Dhirendranath's continued defiance of state discrimination and authoritarianism. At the onset of Bangladesh Liberation War, he was arrested from his  Comilla house on March 29, 1971, three days after the arrest of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, and taken with his son, Dilip Kumar Datta, to Moynamoti Cantonment and tortured to death. For this reason, he is often referred to as "Shaheed" (martyr) as a sign of respect. http://banglapedia.org/HT/D_0057.HTM
His granddaughter, Aroma Datta, lives in Dhaka, Bangladesh, and is Executive Director of PRIP Trust, a prominent NGO focused on humanitarian work.

==Quotes==

Dhirendranath Datta's speech of 23 February 1948 to the Pakistan Constituent Assembly in Karachi, presided over by Mohammad Ali Jinnah, was the first formal articulation of the demand for Bengali to be made one of the state languages of Pakistan. This culminated in the Language Movement of 1952 and the martyrdom of the Language Heroes. This movement is regarded by many as the first step towards the Liberation Movement leading to independence of Bangladesh in 1971. For this reason, Dhirendranath Datta's speech is regarded as one of the most important events in the history of East Pakistan and Bangladesh.

==Further references==

==References==



