[[Eliot A. Jardines]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American civil servants, American people of Cuban descent, American people of Costa Rican descent, University of New Mexico alumni, University of Connecticut alumni, George Washington University alumni, Open-source intelligence, Eagle Scouts, Year of birth missing (living people), Assistant Deputy Director of National Intelligence for Open Source, People from Fairfield, Connecticut

Eliot A. Jardines was the first Assistant Deputy Director of National Intelligence for Open Source (ADDNI/OS) in the United States.DNI Open Source Conference 2008 "Decision Advantage" agenda, Office of the Director of National Intelligence, July 2008.

==Early life and education==

Born in New York City to a Cuban father and Costa Rican mother, Jardines is fluent in Spanish and was raised in Fairfield, Connecticut. As a teenager, he achieved the rank of Eagle Scout (Boy Scouts of America).Eliot A. Jardines - LinkedIn profile http://www.linkedin.com/in/jardines He is a graduate of the University of New Mexico with a dual degree in political science and Latin American studies. He received a Master of Arts degree in international studies from the University of Connecticut and a Master of Science in Strategic Intelligence degree from the Joint Military Intelligence College. He is currently pursuing a doctorate in Executive Leadership at George Washington University.GWU Executive Leadership Doctoral Program Newsletter July '06.pdf July 2006

==Military career==

Jardines served in military intelligence assignments overseas and in the United States in both the active Army and the Army Reserve. He got his start in open source intelligence as a member of the US Army's 434th Military Intelligence Detachment (Strategic), which was affiliated with Yale University and commanded by then Colonel Rob Simmons, a former Connecticut Congressman. According to press reports, Jardines ran OSINT efforts at the 66th Military Intelligence Group in Augsburg, Germany.St. Petersburg Times "Military Star Sidesteps Scandal" 28 May 2004

==Business career (1996-2005)==

Mr. Jardines was the founder and president of Open Source Publishing, Inc., a privately held firm providing open source intelligence support to the public and private sectors.Jardines, Eliot A. (21 June 2005), "Testimony of Eliot A. Jardines", Using Open Source Effectively: Hearings before the Subcommittee on Intelligence, Information and Terrorism Risk Assessment, Committee on Homeland Security, United States House of Representatives, pp. 11-18. The firm was acquired by Radiance Technologies, Inc., where he served as the director of the Radiance Open Source Intelligence Division.Office of the Director of National Intelligence "ODNI Senior Leadership Announcement". Press release, 7 December 2005. 

==Assistant Deputy Director of National Intelligence (2005-2008)==

Assuming his position on 5 December 2005, he was responsible for developing strategic direction, establishing policy and managing fiscal resources for open source exploitation as well as document and media exploitation for the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI).
He is notable as the foremost U.S. federal government authority with respect to Open source intelligence, for establishing the National Open Source Enterprise"National Open Source Enterprise Vision Statement" May 2006 and for authoring ICD301.DNI Intelligence Community Directive 301 - "National Open Source Enterprise" 11 July 2006. According to an intelligence blogger, Jardines was a contender for the CIA Director position when Porter Goss resigned.

==Current position==

Jardines returned to the private sector as the Chief Knowledge Officer of CENTRA Technology, Inc. in April 2008. He currently serves on the Loudoun County Criminal Justice Board, Clarke County Sheriff's Office Advisory Council, and the Shenandoah University Business School Advisory Board.

==References==

==Further reading==


