[[Missouri Route 30]]

CATEGORIES: State highways in Missouri, U.S. Route 66 in Missouri, Roads in St. Louis, Missouri, Roads in St. Louis County, Missouri, Roads in Jefferson County, Missouri, Roads in Franklin County, Missouri

Route 30 is a highway in eastern Missouri.  Its eastern terminus is at the Interstate 55/Interstate 44 junction in St. Louis.  Its western terminus is at Interstate 44 in St. Clair.  In St. Louis, the section between Interstate 44 and Route 366 is part of historic U.S. Route 66 and is marked as such.  In the St. Louis area, it is known as Gravois Avenue or Gravois Road.  Further south, Gravois Rd is used to mark the old section of the highway where the newer, divided highway rerouted Highway 30.

==Route description==

Route 30 begins as it crosses over Interstate 55 at I-55's interchange with I-44.  The four-lane road turns southwest as Gravois Rd and, after about two miles (3 km), intersects Route 366.  Shortly after the intersection with Route 366(where a Quiktrip is now open), the road becomes a narrow street passing through some older parts of St. Louis.  At the city limits of St. Louis, it continues into the suburban area (unincorporated).  Shortly before reaching Grantwood Village is the northern terminus with Route 21.  About two miles (3 km) further west is the intersection with Lindbergh Blvd (US 61/US 67/US 50) and the road becomes a four-lane divided highway.  A mile past Lindbergh Boulevard is the junction with I-270, and two miles (3 km) southwest of that is an interchange over Route 141.
As the highway continues southwest in the suburban St. Louis area, the road has several traffic lights which gradually diminish as the road approaches Cedar Hill.  West of Cedar Hill, the divided highway ends and the road becomes a winding road all the way to its end.  A portion of the highway over the Meramec River was re-routed in the early 2000s when a new, wider bridge was built. 
West of Lonedell is the beginning of a concurrency with Route 47.  The concurrency ends five miles (8 km) later inside the city limits of St. Clair.  The road briefly joins former U.S. Route 66, turns a corner, and ends at Interstate 44.

==Major intersections==

==Mass Transit==

The southern half of MetroBus Route #10 (Lindell-Gravois) follows Gravois Ave from the Civic Center Station at 14th and Spruce, then onto Tucker and Chouteau. From Tucker, the route follows nearly the entirety of Gravois Ave until it reaches the Hampton Loop at Hampton and Gravois.

