[[Michael Geist]]

CATEGORIES: 1968 births, Living people, Canadian bloggers, Canadian columnists, Lawyers in Ontario, Canadian legal scholars, Computer law scholars, Copyright scholars, Canada Research Chairs, Canadian copyright law, University of Western Ontario alumni, York University alumni, Columbia Law School alumni, University of Ottawa faculty, Alumni of Wolfson College, Cambridge, Toronto Star people

Michael Allen Geist (born 11 July 1968) is a Canadian academic, and the Canada Research Chair in Internet and E-Commerce Law at the University of Ottawa. Geist was educated at the University of Western Ontario where he received his Bachelors of Laws before going on to get his Masters of Laws at both Osgoode Hall Law School and Cambridge University. After that, he attended Columbia Law School where he got his Doctorate in Law.Columnist Bio - Toronto Star
His weekly columns on new technology and its legal ramifications appear in the Vancouver Sun, Toronto Star and the Ottawa Citizen. He served on Canada's National Task Force on Spam and is the founder of the Canadian Internet Policy and Public Interest Clinic. Geist is active on many boards, including the CANARIE Board of Directors,CANARIE Board of Directors the CanLII Board of Directors,Canadian Legal Information Institute Board of Directors the Privacy Commissioner of Canada's Expert Advisory Board,Privacy Commissioner of Canada’s Expert Advisory Board the Electronic Frontier Foundation Advisory Board,Electronic Frontier Foundation Advisory Board and on the Information Program Sub-Board of the Open Society Institute.michaelgeist.ca   He was also a board member of the Canadian Internet Registration Authority, which manages the dot.ca domain, for six years.
Geist was named one of Canada’s Top 40 Under 40 in 2002.Canada’s Top 40 Under 40 In 2010, he was listed globally as one of the top fifty influential people in regards to intellectual property by Managing Intellectual Property."Meet the 50 Most Influential People in IP", Managing Intellectual Property, July 1, 2010

==2007 Canadian copyright legislation==

Geist received widespread public attention from mainstream and citizen media in the winter of 2007 for leading the public response to proposed Canadian copyright changes.[ref]
</ref>
According to Dr. Geist and many others the Canadian legislation included the worst aspects of the 1998 U.S. Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA). In December, 2007, Geist said the legislation will likely "mirror the DMCA with strong anti-circumvention legislation — far beyond what is needed to comply with the WIPO Internet treaties," and will likely contain no protection for "flexible fair dealing. No parody exception. No time shifting exception. No device shifting exception. No expanded backup provision. Nothing."[ref]

</ref>
Widespread online and offline support, from activist and author Cory Doctorow to over 30,000 Facebook users, led to the tabling of the copyright legislation by Industry Minister Jim Prentice until 2008.

==ACTA==

Michael Geist is considered an expertJuha Saarinen: Q & ACTA, with Michael Geist. A brief chat with a global expert on the ACTA treaty. ITnews.com.au, April 13, 2010  about the proposed international Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA) which he covers frequently on his blog, criticizing the negotiation process for lack of transparency and warning of possible negative consequences for Internet users.ACTA Posts

==Bill C-32 and Bill C-11==

In December 2010, he wrote a paper titled “Clearing Up the Copyright Confusion: Fair Dealing and Bill C-32” “Clearing Up the Copyright Confusion: Fair Dealing and Bill C-32” by Michael Geist, December 2010 where he summarizes and critically examines some of the main issues of this bill. 
Then in October 2011, when the Canadian government began attempts to pass a new bill on copyright reform, which included digital lock rules, called Bill C-11, he wrote “The Daily Digital Lock Dissenter” on his blog.The Daily Digital Lock Dissenter This was a daily blog entry where he introduced former submissions to the government about how Canadians felt about the restrictive digital lock regulations in regards to Bill C-32 and based on the 2009 national copyright consultation. He argued that while Bill C-11 had some valid points, it was too restrictive because it did not take a balanced approach and it was “primarily about satisfying U.S. pressure, not public opinion”.“Why Canada’s New Copyright Bill Remains Flawed” by Michael Geist, October 1, 2011

==Usage-based billing==

In 2011, Geist criticized the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission’s (CRTC) history of inability to foster an atmosphere of competition that would allow third-party internet service providers (ISPs) to gain a foothold in the Canadian market. He did note, with the CRTC's usage based oral hearing on July 19, 2011, that they were making efforts to address this lack of competition and criticized Bell Canada and other major companies for their involvement in limiting smaller ISPs.“The Usage Based Billing Hearing Concludes: Has the CRTC Come to Competition Too Late?” by Michael Geist, July 20, 2011 
Also in 2011, he wrote a study on the true transport costs of a gigabyte for a Canadian consumer from an ISP and concluded it was roughly a total of eight cents per gigabyte but this report was later denounced by the major ISPs, most notably Bell Canada.“What Does a Gigabyte Cost, Revisited” by Michael Geist , July 29, 2011

==Other activities==

In 2008, Geist found that favourable edits to Jim Prentice's Wikipedia article were traced back to Industry Canada computers.
He maintains the following websites:

==Books==

==Awards==

Michael Geist has received numerous awards for his work including the Kroeger Award for Policy Leadership Kroeger Award for Policy Leadership and the Public Knowledge IP3 Award in 2010,Public Knowledge IP3 Award the Les Fowlie Award for Intellectual Freedom from the Ontario Library Association in 2009,Les Fowlie Award for Intellectual Freedom from the Ontario Library Association  the Electronic Frontier Foundation’s Pioneer Award in 2008,Electronic Frontier Foundation’s Pioneer Award  Canarie’s IWAY Public Leadership Award for his contribution to the development of the Internet in Canada Canarie’s IWAY Public Leadership Award in 2003.

==References==

==External links==

===Videos===


