[[South Carolina's 2nd congressional district]]

CATEGORIES: Congressional districts of South Carolina, Aiken County, South Carolina, Allendale County, South Carolina, Barnwell County, South Carolina, Beaufort County, South Carolina, Calhoun County, South Carolina, Hampton County, South Carolina, Jasper County, South Carolina, Lexington County, South Carolina, Orangeburg County, South Carolina, Richland County, South Carolina

The 2nd Congressional District of South Carolina is a congressional district in central and southwestern South Carolina.  The district spans from Columbia to the South Carolina side of the Augusta, Georgia metropolitan area.
From 1993 to 2013 it included all of Lexington, Jasper, Hampton, Allendale and Barnwell counties; most of Richland and Beaufort counties and parts of Aiken, Calhoun and Orangeburg counties.  Besides Columbia (60 percent of which was in the district), major cities in the district were Beaufort and Hilton Head Island.  It was made more compact in the 2010 round of redistricting, and now comprises all of Lexington, Aiken and Barnwell counties, most of Richland County, and part of Orangeburg County.
The district has been based in Columbia since 1933, when South Carolina lost a district as a result of the 1930 Census; before then, much of its territory had been the 6th District.  For most of its existence as a Columbia-based district, it was a fairly compact district in the central part of the state.  However, after the 1990 census, most of its black residents were drawn into the 6th District, and the district was pushed well to the south and west to make up for the loss in population.
It has been in Republican hands since 1965, when the district's second-term Democratic congressman, Albert Watson, switched parties.  The district's best-known congressman, Floyd Spence, represented the district for over 30 years and was chairman of the House Armed Services Committee from 1995 to 2001, when he died a few months after being elected to a 16th term.  He was succeeded in a special election by one of his former aides, state senator Joe Wilson, who continues to hold the seat.
Wilson's most recent opponent was Rob Miller.

==List of representatives==

==References==


