[[Hugh McManners]]

CATEGORIES: British television producers, British television presenters, Alumni of St Edmund Hall, Oxford, The Sunday Times people, Royal Artillery officers, British Army personnel of the Falklands War, Living people, 1952 births, Graduates of the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst

Joseph Hugh McManners is a British medical research charity director, author, television producer and presenter, journalist, and musician, and songwriter.
He was born into an academic family in Oxford, the son of historian The Rev. Professor John McManners, and was brought up in Australia. He was educated at Sydney Church of England Grammar School, Shore, Magdalen College School, Oxford, and the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst.Speaker Spotlight – Hugh McManners at www.mctevent.co.uk, (accessed 7 September 2007) He read Geography at St Edmund Hall Oxford.
McManners spent eighteen years in the British Army, the majority of his time serving with 3 Commando Brigade. He was commissioned into the Royal Artillery in 1973 and was promoted Lieutenant in 1974 and Captain in 1979.London Gazette
During the Falklands War in 1982 he fought with the Special Boat Service[tpl]Citation needed|date=August 2013[/tpl] and worked with the SAS,  and was awarded a Mention in Despatches. He was promoted Major in 1985. He spent five years with 148 (Meiktila) Commando Forward Observation Battery, as a commando, paratrooper and an army diving supervisor, and ran the British Army's jungle warfare training school in Belize. McManners then passed the year-long Army Staff College course at Camberley, and spent two years working at the Ministry of Defence in London.  He has served at Fort Ord California with the US Army's 2nd Infantry Division (Light), on counter terrorist duties in Armagh, Northern Ireland, and with the United Nations in Cyprus during the Turkish invasion of 1974. After commanding 17 Corunna Field Battery http://www.26thregra-asc.com/17bty.html with the 13th/18th Royal Hussars [tpl]clarify|date=August 2013[/tpl] http://military-genealogy.forcesreunited.org.uk/3598/13_18_Royal_Hussars[tpl]dead link|date=August 2013[/tpl], he retired from the Army in 1989.
McManners was the Defence Correspondent of The Sunday Times newspaper for five years,Hugh McManners biography at www.dorlingkindersley-uk.co.uk, (accessed 7 September 2007) and also contributed to other major UK newspapers including The Observer and The Daily Telegraph also writing an article in The Independent regarding the controversial shoot to kill policy.Hugh McManners: The truth about our 'shoot-to-kill' policy at www.independent.co.uk, (accessed 7 September 2007) He has co-produced a list of television documentaries and series on military subjects. He co-presented the BBC2 Bare Necessities survival series and the critically acclaimed Radio 4 series The Psychology of War. He is the author of many military books including the hard-hitting Scars of War, and several very successful Dorling Kindersley titles, including the Outdoor Training Manual and the Commando Survival Guide.
In 2011, with neuroscientist Prof Morten Kringelbach, he founded The Scars of War Foundation at the University of Oxford's Queen's College. McManners' research into the psychological effects of military combat on participants, joined forces with Prof Kringelbach's neuroimaging studies into how the brain functions. This led to a five-year project to compare the brains of combat veterans of similar experiences with and without combat-related PTSD (post traumatic press disorder).
The Scars of War Foundation is developing further research into the cognitive neuroscience of combat veterans in conjunction with the Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior at the University of California, Los Angeles. Prof Peter Whybrow, the Semel Institute's Director, is the Chair of the Scars of War Foundation's Scientific Advisory Board.
McManners is a Visiting Fellow of Oxford University's Changing Character of War programme.
He continues to work as an author and broadcaster, lives in Oxford, and has two very musical sons. Also a musician and songwriter, he is the singer and guitarist for The BashBand.The Bashband Official Site www.bashband.co.uk, and the HM Band www.hm-band.com (accessed 7 September 2007)

==Works==

==References==


