[[New York Guard]]

CATEGORIES: Military in New York, State defense forces of the United States, New York Civil War regiments

The New York Guard is the state defense force of New York State.  Also called The New York State Military Reserve. As of June 2008, the New York Guard, a recognized command under the New York State's Military law, has line-item funding in the state budget.The State Guard Sentinel; Volume 1, No.3 New York Guard, Spring 2008
Now with a unified command structure, formerly the organization contained an Army Division and an Air Division.  The missions of the New York Guard include augmentation, assistance, and support of the New York Army National Guard and New York Air National Guard respectively and aide to civil authorities in New York State.  New York also has a New York Naval Militia which, with the State Guard and the Army and Air National Guards, is under the command of the Governor of New York, the Adjutant General, and New York's Division of Military and Naval Affairs (DMNA). The New York Guard is one of the largest and best organized State Guards in the United States.[tpl]Citation needed|date=January 2012[/tpl] It is historically derived from Revolutionary and Civil War era state military units that were reorganized several times in American history in response to various international and domestic crises.
Organized under the Military Law, State of New York, the New York Guard cannot be federalized and cannot be deployed outside New York State without the consent of the governor.
Members of the New York Guard are entitled to many of the benefits accorded members of other components of the 'Organized Militia of the State of New York,' the legal collective term describing the New York Army and Air National Guards, New York Naval Militia and New York Guard. These include 'military leave' for employees of state or local governments and many private employers.

==Civil War Era==

For more detail, see List of New York Civil War Regiments
Many units of New York State militia saw service in the American Civil War, after being activated into federal service by President Abraham Lincoln.
The activation of state militia by President Abraham Lincoln led to some conflict with State authorities in command of the units:
Following the Civil War, efforts were made to link the varied military units in New York under overall headquarters. As a result of this the 3rd Brigade, New York State Militia, came into being on 5 August 1886.[tpl]cite web|url=http://dmna.state.ny.us/arng/53trpcmd/53tc.php?id=history|title=53rd Troop Command History|publisher=New York State Division of Military & Naval Affairs|accessdate=14 August 2010[/tpl]

==New York Guard created, 1917==

On 3 August 1917, the Adjutant General of New York, in order to comply with the provisions of the State Constitution requiring that troops be available to the Governor for the protection of life and property of the citizens of New York, organized a state military force known as the New York Guard. The new force replaced the New York National Guard, drafted in the service of the United States on 5 August 1917. The force consisted of the First and Second Provisional Regiments, guarding aqueducts and other infrastructure in the southern portion (First Provisional Regiment) and the remaining parts of the state.
On January 1, 1919, the Guard numbered 22,000 in active service. After the Armistice federalized New York National Guard Units were returned to State control.
On May 21, 1924 Babe Ruth Joined the New York National Guard and was Assigned to the 104th now known as the New York State Guard 2nd 104th In Jamaica Queens Armory. 
A Legend Among Us: New York Guard History Reclaimed
George Herman Ruth, popularly known as "The Babe", "The Bambino", and "The Sultan of Swat", was a member of the 104th Field Artillery, the very same unit today known as the 2nd Battalion, 104th Regiment in Jamaica Queens. On May 21, 1924* the king of baseball homeruns signed the dotted line for three years and joined the proud ranks of civilian soldiers. 
Babe Ruth was sworn in by Colonel James Austin at the Isle of Safety in Times Square in front of a military tent used for enlistment drives.  Once the enlistment papers were filled he symbolically placed them into the open jaws of a horse drawn French 75-millimeter gun.  He was then immediately placed under the command of First Sergeant Adrian Jacques whom was in charge of the regiment present.  He served while he played in the stadium he was destined to rebuild.  A May 29 Washington Post article reported that he appeared before General John Joseph Pershing at State, War and Navy building in Washington** once he was fitted and squared away.
The 104th Field Artillery under went several changes over the years while in active duty. The unit served briefly under Federal control on November 5, 1916 for Mexican Border control, then returned to state status on November 15, 1916. In addition, the unit was activated for Federal service during World War I and II.  It wasn’t until 1917 that the unit received it’s destination as the 104th Field Artillery and saw extensive service in France. 
After World War I, the unit was demobilized but shortly reactivated into the New York National Guard until 1959 when it reorganized as the 104th Field Artillery Regiment. In the early 1990s the New York Guard was reorganized at the Jamaica Queens Armory and redesigned as the 2nd Battalion, 104th Regiment.

==New York Guard, 1940==

With the advent of World War II, New York National Guard units were federalized and the New York Guard was created for service to the State.NY Guard Members Remember New York Guard State Volunteer Force, May 6, 2011
In 1942  Former Heavyweight Champion Boxer Lt Jack Dempsey Joins New York Guard

==New York Guard, 2001 and beyond==

The New York Guard experienced a resurgence after the September 11, 2001 attacks. New York Guard units were activated after the attacks, performing a variety of missions, including, logistical support to forces stationed at "Ground Zero". Medical units of the Guard worked in conjunction with other DMNA forces providing care at several location including Camp Smith, in Westchester county.
Principal occupational specialties of the New York Guard include, communications, engineering, medical and legal services, provided in support of all components of New York State military forces, i.e., the Army and Air National Guards, Naval Militia and the New York Guard, as well as to civil authorities.
Currently, trained and state certified New York Guard soldiers augment and assist National Guard units in the following missions: weapons of mass destruction WMD decontamination - the joint New York Army National Guard / New York Air National Guard / New York Guard decontamination - or CERF - team was activated by the governor for state duty for 11 days during the 2004 Republican National Convention in New York City, Military Emergency Radio Network - the Guard is assigned to operate the MERN at various locations to insure the free flow of information during an emergency, and search and rescue (SAR) a secondary mission to the state - New York Guard SAR teams have been mobilized, for example, in the summer of 2006 to search for a missing camper in the Adirondack Mountains preserve. Selected units and personnel of the New York Guard were called to State Active Duty with pay in response to Hurricane Irene in 2011.
2012 saw the largest deployment of the New York Guard since the September 11th, 2001 attacks. Every brigade was at least partially activated for service during 'Superstorm' Sandy. NY Guard members served as equals alongside the Army National Guard, Air National Guard, and New York Naval Militia, at one point making up approximately one third of all troops in the field during a two-month deployment.
New York State Guard personnel provide training to the New York Army and Air national guards including first aid and firearms training at Camp Smith training center.
The 244th Medical Clinic works with the NY Army National Guard Medical Command (MEDCOM), augmenting National Guard personnel for in-state MEDCOM missions. These have included screening of National Guard personnel in Soldier Readiness Programs and 'reintegration' programs for both soldiers and their families upon troops' return from overseas deployment.
In addition to its SAR work as a secondary mission under the New York State Defense Emergency Act and Article 2-B of State and Local, Natural and Man-Made disasters Act, engineer units of the NY Guard 10th and 65th Brigades have built facilities for the National Guard.
Civil affairs units provide legal services to about-to-deploy troops such as wills and counseling on legal protections under federal and state law.
The New York Guard augments the capabilities of the National Guard, serving only within New York State. Guard personnel are drawn from almost every profession - from plumbers to professors, clerks and CEOs, persons with long prior military service and those without, and every part of the state.
The headquarters unit of the New York Guard is located at Camp Smith, Cortlandt Manor, NY. Camp Smith is a New York State military reservation. It is adjacent to Peekskill, NY and about 35 miles north of New York City.

==Military Occupational Specialties==

The following are some of the many Military Occupational Specialties in the New York state guard
Medical, including Physicians, Dentists, Nurses, Psychologists, Physical and Occupational Therapists, counselors and allied specialities
Engineering/Construction
Intelligence specialist
Training/operations specialist
Band

==Training==

All New York Guard enlisted recruits, unless they have prior military experience, must attend Initial Entry Training (IET). After completion of one week of IET at Camp Smith, soldiers may take any of the following courses based on their military occupational specialty (MOS) and rank. Officers, unless they have prior commissioned military experience, must complete a branch immaterial officer's basic course after appointment.
NYG Schools
The following schools are offered by the New York Guard.
Additional Training
Most NYG soldiers have augmented their training by taking courses with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Department of Homeland Security (DHS), and various other local and state agencies.

==Major subordinate commands==

The Major Subordinate Commands of the New York Guard are:

==Awards and decorations of the New York Guard==

New York Guard personnel are eligible to receive both New York State and New York Guard awards and decorations. The New York Guard issues several awards.
New York Guard (NYG) Awards:New York Guard Decorations and Awards
Descriptions of New York State awards and decorations may be found at the web site of the New York Division of Military and Naval Affairs: dmna.state.ny.us

==See also==

==References==

==External links==

===Unit pages===


