[[5 Takes]]

CATEGORIES: 2005 American television series debuts, 2000s American television series, 2010s American television series, American documentary television series, English-language television programming, Discovery Channel shows, Travel Channel shows, Travelogues

5 Takes is a travel series that airs on the Travel Channel. The series documents bloggers and vloggers traveling to locations of the world while interacting online with viewers. Viewers often suggest locations the hosts, referred to as "TJs" ("travel journalists"), should visit. The series was invented and produced by Lisa Lambden and Michael Rosenblum of Rosenblumtv.com
To date, there have been four seasons shown on the Travel Channel in the US.
When the original episodes of 5 Takes air in the United States, all of the footage and travel is said to have taken place in the ten days preceding the debut.

==Season One- 5 Takes: Europe==

The series debuted on the Travel Channel on July 23, 2005.  Its season finale was on September 10, 2005.  It took the first group of TJs to Europe.  A highlight of this season included two of the TJs, (often referred to as Travel Journalists in the first season) Ronnie and Derek, traveling unexpectedly to London after the July 7 bombings, which took place while the show was being filmed in Europe.  The other cities that the TJs visited, in order of travel, were: Barcelona, Paris (and London), Amsterdam, Prague, Venice, Athens, and Berlin.
The TJs who appeared in the first season were:

==Season Two- 5 Takes: Pacific Rim==

Season two was a more ambitious project, since the TJs and crew had to travel over much greater distances to more cities and encountered a much greater diversity of cultures and countries than Season One.  5 Takes: Pacific Rim debuted on the Travel Channel on March 19, 2006 and ran until the season finale on June 18, 2006.
The trip took the TJs to a number of cities throughout the Pacific Rim.  The cities visited were: Sydney, Cairns, Perth, Darwin, and Melbourne, all in Australia; Auckland, Wellington and Queenstown, all in New Zealand; Singapore; Taipei, Taiwan; Hong Kong and Bangkok, Thailand.
The TJs chosen for 5 Takes: Pacific Rim were:

==Season Three- 5 Takes: U.S.A==

This season is different from the others by the fact that the TJ's are foreigners visiting the United States.
Cities visited were: Las Vegas, Anchorage, Alaska, Washington, D.C., Orlando/Miami, Florida, Memphis, Tennessee, New York City, Austin, Texas and San Francisco (which was chosen by an online vote).
The TJ's chosen for 5 Takes: USA were:

==Season Four- 5 Takes: Latin America==

This season premiered on June 2, 2007 with the TJs in Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Other locations visited this season were Manaus, Rio de Janeiro, Chile, Peru, Colombia, Costa Rica and Mexico.
The TJs who appear in this season are:

==External links==


