</ref> and in the west it continues northwards into [[Namibia]] and [[Angola]].<ref>
[/ref] The Times comprehensive atlas of the world (1999). p. 89. Times Books Group, London.
Different names are applied to different stretches of the Great Escarpment, the most well-known section being the Drakensberg (diagram on the left). The Schwarzrand and edge of the Khomas Highland in Namibia, as well as the Serra da Chela in Angola, are also well-known names.

==Geological origins==

About 180 million years ago, a mantle plume under southern Gondwana caused bulging of the continental crust in the area that would later become southern Africa.McCarthy, T. & Rubidge, B. (2005). The story of earth and life. p. 263. Struik Publishers, Cape Town.  Within 10 – 20 million years rift valleys formed on either side of the central bulge, which became flooded to become the proto-Atlantic and proto-Indian Oceans.McCarthy, T. & Rubidge, B. (2005). The story of earth and life. p. 245-248. Struik Publishers, Cape Town.Truswell, J.F. (1977). The geological evolution of South Africa. pp. 184–188. Purnell, Cape Town. The stepped steep walls of these rift valleys formed escarpments that surrounded the newly formed Southern African subcontinent.
With the widening of the Atlantic, Indian and Southern Oceans, Southern Africa became tectonically quiescent. Earthquakes rarely occur, and there has been no volcanic or orogenic activity for about 50 million years.Encyclopaedia Britannica (1975); Macropaedia, Vol. 17. p. 60. Helen Hemingway Benton Publishers, Chicago. This resulted in an almost uninterrupted period of erosion, continuing to the present, which shaved off a layer, many kilometers thick, from the surface of the plateau. A thick layer of marine sediment was consequently deposited onto the continental shelf (the lower steps of the original rift valley walls) which surrounds the subcontinent.Truswell, J.F. (1977). The geological evolution of South Africa. pp. 190. Purnell, Cape Town.
During the past 20 million years, Southern Africa has experienced further massive uplifting, especially in the east, with the result that most of the plateau, despite the extensive erosion, lies above 1000 m, tilted so that it is at its highest in the east, sloping gently downwards towards the west and south. Thus the altitude of the edge of the eastern escarpments is typically in excess of 2000 m. It reaches its highest point (over 3000 m) where the escarpment forms the Lesotho - KwaZulu-Natal international border.McCarthy, T. & Rubidge, B. (2005) The story of earth and life. p. 267-269. Struik Publishers.Atlas of Southern Africa. (1984). Readers Digest Association, Cape Town
The uplifting of the central plateau itself during the past 20 million years caused the original escarpment to be moved inland through erosion to its present position.McCarthy, T.S. (2013) The Okavango delta and its place in the geomorphological evolution of Southern Africa. South African Journal of Geology 116: 1-54. The position of the present escarpment is therefore well inland of the original fault lines which formed the walls of the rift valleys that developed during the break-up of Gondwana.
Because of the extensive erosion of the plateau itself, during most of the Mesozoic and Cenozoic eras, none of its surface rocks (except the Kalahari sands) are younger than 180 million years.McCarthy, T. & Rubidge, B. (2005). The story of earth and life. p. 16-17, 209. Struik Publishers, Cape Town.Geological map of South Africa, Lesotho and Swaziland (1970). Council for Geoscience, Geological Survey of South Africa. The youngest rocks that remain cap the plateau in Lesotho. These are the Clarens Formation laid down under desert conditions about 200 million years ago, topped by a 1600 m thick layer of lava which erupted, and covered most of Southern Africa, and indeed large parts of Gondwana, about 180 million years ago.McCarthy, T. & Rubidge, B. (2005). The story of earth and life. pp. 209 - 211. Struik Publishers, Cape Town.Truswell, J.F. (1977). The geological evolution of South Africa. pp. 151 - 153. Purnell, Cape Town.[tpl]cite book|last=Sycholt|first=August|title=A Guide to the Drakensberg|editor=Roxanne Reid|publisher=Struik Publishers|location=Cape Town|year=2002|page=9|isbn=1-86872-593-6[/tpl] These rocks form the steep sides of the Great Escarpment in this region, where its upper edge reaches an altitude in excess of 3000 m.
The surface below the escarpment has, in general, eroded more than the plateau, so that rocks more than 3000 million years old are found in the Mpumalanga Lowveld below the Mpumalanga portion of the Great Escarpment.
The eastern portion of the Great Escarpment (the Drakensberg) terminates in the north near Tzaneen at about the 22° S parallel. The absence of the Great Escarpment for about 450 km (280 miles) to the north of Tzaneen (to reappear on the border between Zimbabwe and Mozambique in the Chimanimani Highlands), is due to a failed westerly branch of the main rift that caused Antarctica to start drifting away from Southern Africa during the break up of Gondwana about 150 million years ago. The lower Limpopo River and Rio Save drain into the Indian Ocean through what remains of this relict incipient rift valley, which now forms part of the South African Lowveld.

==Appearance==

The eastern portion of the Great Escarpment within the borders of South Africa (see the accompanying map) is referred to as the DrakensbergThe Times comprehensive atlas of the World. (1999) p. 90. Times Books Group, London. (meaning “Dragon Mountains”), because of the Escarpment’s appearance from below. The Limpopo, Mpumalanga and Lesotho Drakensberg have hard erosion resistant upper surfaces and therefore have a very high and rugged appearance, combining steep-sided blocks and pinnacles. The KwaZulu-Natal - Free State Drakensberg escarpment is composed of softer rocks and therefore has a more rounded, softer appearance from below. The top of the Escarpment is generally almost table-top flat and smooth, even in Lesotho. The "Lesotho Mountains" are formed away from the Drakensberg escarpment by erosion gulleys which turn into deep valleys which contain the tributaries that flow into the Orange river. There are so many of these tributaries that it gives the Lesotho Highlands a very rugged mountainous appearance, both from the ground and from the air.
The rest of the Escarpment, on the south and west sides of the central plateau, is, like the portion of the Drakensberg between KwaZulu-Natal - Free State, composed of softer rocks, aged between 250-300 million years old. This means that in parts the Escarpment has been eroded away to such an extent that the scarp is no longer evident (for instance along the route taken by the N1 highway between Beaufort West, below the escarpment, and Richmond, on the plateau; and also where the Orange River has eroded a broad valley through the Escarpment in the west before it flows into the Atlantic Ocean). However, along most of its extent it forms a 400-800 m  high mountain-like ridge which roads into the interior have to negotiate, sometimes up steep winding passes, such as the Burke's, Vanrhyns, Bloukrans, Gannaga, Ouberg, Verlatekloof, Teekloof, Molteno, Goliatskraal, Daggaboersnek, Katberg, Nico Malan and Barkly passes. Nevertheless, the Escarpment to the south and west of the plateau lacks the grandeur of the Mpumalaga and Lesotho Drakensberg, on the one hand, and the extremely rugged, intricately folded, ranges of Cape Fold Mountains which run parallel to the coast on the seaward side of the Great Escarpment. (The parallel ranges of mountains, to the south of the Escarpment, can clearly be seen on the accompanying satellite image of South Africa, especially when compared to the diagram on the left, which shows the course of the Great Escarpment.) The fold mountains were formed about 330 million years ago,McCarthy, T. & Rubidge, B. (2005) The story of earth and life. p. 192-195. Struik Publishers.Truswell, J.F. (1977) The geological evolution of South Africa. p 157-159. Purnell, Cape Town. and therefore pre-date the formation of the escarpment by nearly 200 million years. The two events are geologically unrelated to one another. They also represent two very different geological processes: the Great Escarpment resulted from rifting, and the tearing apart of the Gondwana super-continent, whereas the Cape Fold Mountains resulted from the collision of tectonic plates, during the assembly of Gondwana, in the same way that the Andes Mountains in South America are being formed today.
The Cape Fold Mountains have been re-exposed by erosion of the coastal plain below the Great Escarpment (see "Geological origin", above), after having been covered by sediments originating from an even higher and more extensive range of mountains, comparable to the Himalayas, that developed during the assembly of Gondwana to the south of the present African continent, on the portion of Gondwana called the "Falkland Plateau", the remnants of which are at present located far to the southwest of Southern Africa close to southern tip of South America.McCarthy, T. & Rubidge, B. (2005) The story of earth and life. p. 199-209, 245-248. Struik Publishers.

==References==


