[[Chicago Story]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 American television series debuts, 1982 American television series endings, 1980s American television series, American crime television series, American drama television series, English-language television programming, American medical television series, NBC network shows, Television shows set in Chicago, Illinois, Television series by Warner Bros. Television

Chicago Story is an NBC drama that aired in the spring of 1982.

==Synopsis==

The series followed the work and lives of several Chicago lawyers, police officers, and doctors. The series was similar to Hill Street Blues in that it was less about action scenes and more about the stresses of working in law enforcement and medicine. The show did not catch on with viewers and lasted only thirteen episodes.
The cast included Maud Adams and Kristoffer Tabori as Dr. Judith Bergstrom and Dr. Max Carson, doctors at Cook County Hospital; Craig T. Nelson, Vincent Baggetta and Molly Cheek as attorneys Ken Dutton, Lou Pellegrino and Megan Powers. Dutton was a prosecutor and Pellegrino was a defense attorney; Powers was a lawyer both men were interested in; and Dennis Franz, Richard Lawson and Daniel Hugh Kelly appeared as police officers Joe Gilland, O.Z. Tate and Frank Wajorski, respectively.  Gilland was a beat cop, while Tate and Wajorski were detectives.
Intermixed within, especially during the opening title sequence, was plenty of Chicago scenery, including the John Hancock Center; Merchandise Mart; Michigan Avenue; Wrigley Building; Willis Tower (formerly known as Sears Tower); Aon Center; (back when it was known as the Standard Oil Building), the Chicago Theater and its famous marquee; Lake Shore Drive; The former headquarters of The Chicago Sun-Times; the Chicago Water Tower; Marina City; the Chicago 'L' and various other sights.  One of the settings was the former Cook County Hospital.  
Chicago Story was notable for attempting to air an hour and a half per episode. The show was pared down to an hour per episode late in its run, including broadcasting edited versions of episodes that had already aired.
Two of the stars found fame in better roles later on, Dennis Franz played Andy Sipowicz on NYPD Blue; Craig T. Nelson went on to star in the comedy series Coach in the title role of Hayden Fox.
Episodes were rebroadcast on TNT Network in 1994.

==External links==


