[[Freeman Bosley, Jr.]]

CATEGORIES: Mayors of St. Louis, Missouri, African-American mayors, 1954 births, Living people, African-American politicians, Saint Louis University alumni, Saint Louis University School of Law alumni

Freeman R. Bosley Jr. (born July 20, 1954, St. Louis, Missouri) was the forty-third mayor of St. Louis (from 1993 to 1997), and the city's first African-American mayor.

==Early life and education==

Bosley graduated from Central High School in 1972 and went on to attend Saint Louis University and Saint Louis University School of Law.http://exhibits.slpl.org/mayors/data/dt44496704.asp He graduated from Saint Louis University in 1976 with two undergraduate degrees, a B.A. in Urban Affairs and a B.A. in Political Science. He received his Juris Doctor from Saint Louis University School of Law in 1979. While a student at Saint Louis University, Bosley was president of the Black Student Alliance and the Black-American Law Students Association, organizations that were formed during the Civil Rights Movement.

==Career==

Upon graduation from law school, Bosley was staff attorney for Legal Services of Eastern Missouri, specializing in Consumer Affairs and Utility Companies. Bosley has also been employed by the law firm of Boast and Jordan.
Bosley was selected as the first African-American St. Louis Circuit Clerk for the 22nd Judicial Circuit, a position he held for ten years. He later served as the 3rd Ward Democratic Committeeman. He then became chairman of the St. Louis City Democratic Central Association and subsequently became the first African-American chairman of the Democratic Party in St. Louis City.
Bosley became the first African-American mayor of St. Louis on April 6, 1993 with 66.5% of the vote. Early in his administration, he oversaw the city's struggle during the Flood of 1993. Bosley also assisted in orchestrating the $70 million bailout of Trans World Airlines. He helped move the Los Angeles Rams football team to St. Louis from Anaheim, California. Two property tax increases were passed during the Bosley Administration. 
Bosley's term was colored by corruption scandals. Crime increased throughout north St. Louis city and his popularity plummeted. He was defeated by Clarence Harmon in his bid for re-election in 1997. In 2001, when Bosley ran for mayor in the Democratic Primary, he was defeated again by a wide margin, this time by Francis Slay.
Mr. Bosley is currently the Principal of Bosley and Associates, L.L.C.

==References==


