[[Jorge Molina Enríquez]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 births, Living people, People from Santiago de Cuba Province, Cuban film directors

Jorge Molina Enríquez (born 1966 in Palma Soriano in the province of Santiago) is a Cuban actor and film director. After studying cinema in the USSR, he graduated from the Escuela Internacional de Cine y Television (International Film and TV School of San Antonio de los Baños, Cuba), known as EICTV. His thesis film, Molina's Culpa was a controversial tale with anti-Catholic content.
As an actor, Molina has appeared in close to 80 films (including student films and shorts), most notably in Cuban filmmaker Fernando Perez's films Madagascar, La vida es silbar and Madrigal. He recently he played one of the leading characters in the international hit Juan de los Muertos. His own works are always irreverent and provocative low budget productions, featuring plenty of sexual activity and violence. American film scholar Ruth Goldberg's essay on Molina's work appears in the anthology "Fear Without Frontiers: Horror Cinema Across the Globe", edited by Steven Jay Schneider. 
In 2008 Jorge Molina won funds from CINERGIA (Fund for the Promotion of the Audiovisual in Central America and the Caribbean). The jury granted Molina with $10.000 for producing his shortfilm Molina's Ferrozz, based on Charles Perraul's fairytale "Little Red Riding Hood". When he received the funds, Panamanian writer and frequent collaborator Edgar Soberón Torchia suggested he could extend the script, Molina agreed and he finally directed his first feature film, which was exhibited during the annual film festival in La Habana. Recently he has been in talks with the Cuban film institute for the production of the script by Alán González Hernández, Molina's Sílfide (aka as Amira), from a tale by Arturo Arango.
Molina currently holds a position as the cultural liaison at the EICTV, and also teaches directing at the Instituto Superior de Arte in La Habana. He lives in San Antonio de los Banos with his wife and their two daughters.

==External links==


