[[WTJR]]

CATEGORIES: Television stations in Illinois, Channel 16 virtual TV stations in the United States, Channel 32 digital TV stations in the United States, Television channels and stations established in 1986, 1986 establishments in Illinois

WTJR is a Christian television station located in Quincy, Illinois. It airs a full-power digital broadcast on channel 32 using PSIP to display its virtual channel as 16.1. The station is owned by Christian Television Network, which acquired WTJR from another religious broadcaster, Believers Broadcasting Corporation, in June 2006. The station offers a variety of Christian programming, both locally-produced and from the CTN network.

==Digital television==

The station's digital channel is multiplexed:

==Technical History==

WTJR applied for its television station construction permit on January 12, 1982.
WTJR was granted its television license February 21, 1992.
In the early days at WTJR the station was beset with some major technical challenges. The construction of an 850' x 7' face, stainless type G tower, with 36 guy wires was first on the list. The station had little finances, it was a non-profit and viewer supported. The GM at the time Carl Geisendorfer acquired a used tower, and proceeded to buy a used 18 wheel Semi and trailer and hauled the tower to Quincy Illinois one piece at a time. It was then sandblasted painted and erected.
The first transmitter was an UHF RCA TTU1. It was off-the-air as much as on-the-air for many years. Problems with air flow, water cooling, old tubes, and intermittent electronics. This Transmitter was replaced with a used General Electric UHF TT-59a transmitter with klystron power tube.
The next transmitter was a used Harris UHF Transmitter, Harris HD-40 Sigma classic with IOT power tube. This transmitter was a laboratory test transmitter at Harris Broadcasting in Quincy Illinois. It was the only sigma at that time constructed in house (the rest came from England). This transmitter was replaced with a Harris DTV sigma CD, IOT power tube transmitter. This latter transmitter is the current transmitter.
WTJR stopped broadcasting on its analog TV channel 16 on January 20, 2009.

==References==

==External links==


