[[Evelyn Boyd Granville]]

CATEGORIES: 1924 births, Women mathematicians, American women scientists, Women computer scientists, Women in technology, Smith College alumni, Yale University alumni, California State University, Los Angeles faculty, University of Texas at Tyler faculty, Living people, IBM employees, 20th-century American mathematicians, African-American women academics, African-American academics, American academics

Evelyn Boyd Granville (born May 1, 1924) was the second African-American woman in the U.S. to receive a PhD in mathematics; she earned it in 1949 from Yale University. Her dissertation was "On Laguerre Series in the Complex Domain."
The first African-American woman to earn a PhD in mathematics was Euphemia Haynes who was awarded her PhD from Catholic University in 1943.

==Life==

With financial support from her aunt and a small partial scholarship from Phi Delta Kappa, Granville entered Smith College in the fall of 1941. She majored in mathematics and physics, but also took a keen interest in astronomy. She was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and to Sigma Xi and graduated summa cum laude in 1945. In L.A., Granville accepted the position of Research Specialist with the Space and Information Systems Division of the North American Aviation Company, but returned to IBM the following year. Both positions involved trajectory analysis and orbit computation. In 1967, Granville’s marriage ended in divorce. At the same time, IBM was cutting staff in Los Angeles, so Granville applied for a teaching position at California State University in Los Angeles, California.
She moved to California State University at Los Angeles in 1967 as a full professor of mathematics and married Edward V. Granville in 1970. After retiring from California State in 1984 she joined the faculty of the University of Texas at Tyler as professor and chair of mathematics.  There she developed elementary school math enrichment programs. 
One of three African American women honored by the National Academy of Science in 1999, she has been awarded honorary degrees by Smith College and Lincoln University.

==References==

==External links==


