[[Mother Cabrini High School]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 1899, Girls' schools in New York, Washington Heights, Manhattan, Schools in Manhattan, Roman Catholic secondary schools in New York City, 1899 establishments in New York

Mother Cabrini High School (MCHS) is a Catholic high school located at 701 Fort Washington Avenue between Fort Tryon Park and West 190th Street, with a facade on Cabrini Boulevard, in the Hudson Heights neighborhood of Washington Heights in Upper Manhattan, New York City. The school was founded in 1899 by Frances Xavier Cabrini and is sponsored by the Missionary Sisters of the Sacred Heart of Jesus, the order she founded. It offers specialized and distinctive programs of study to enhance the education of students.
The school draws its students from "all over New York City and Westchester, with a large concentration of students from Manhattan and the Bronx." Through much of its history, the student body was largely the children of Irish and Italian immigrants, but the school is now completely Latino, primarily from the Dominican Republic."Mother Cabrini High School To Close Its Doors After 115 Years" CBS New York (January 15, 20014)
In January 2014, the school announced that it would be closing at the end of the school year.

==Orientation==

Orientation lasts for two days and is designed to introduce students to the building, faculty, and peers.  For the first six weeks of class, the guidance department assists students in their adjustment to high school.  Each student is assigned a senior or junior to be their peer counselor.  All new students meet with a guidance counselor once a cycle.

==Awards and recognition==

Mother Cabrini High School has been twice recognized with the Blue Ribbon School Award of Excellence by the United States Department of Education,Blue Ribbon Schools Program: Schools Recognized 1972 -1983 through 1999-2002 (PDF), United States Department of Education. Accessed May 11, 2006. the highest award an American school can receive.CIBA cited as one of the best by Education Department, Journal Inquirer, November 16, 2006. "The Blue Ribbon award is given only to schools that reach the top 10 percent of their state's testing scores over several years or show significant gains in student achievement. It is considered the highest honor a school can achieve."Viers Mill School Wins Blue Ribbon; School Scored High on Statewide Test; The Washington Post. September 29, 2005 "For their accomplishments, all three schools this month earned the status of Blue Ribbon School, the highest honor the U.S. Education Department can bestow upon a school."

==Pending closure==

On January 14, 2014, the Board of Trustees of the school announced on the school website that Mother Cabrini High School would close at the end of the school year, due to "increased costs and diminishing revenue.""Press Release: Mother Cabrini High School to Close" on the school website A post on the website elaborated, saying that the school's deficit had reached "unsustainable levels", despite a projected increase in enrollment and rental income. The deficit was blamed on
 the economic downturn of the past five years ... declining enrollment, managing the growing maintenance expenses of an aging facility, absorbing the cost of unfunded scholarships and tuition assistance, confronting the rising cost of insurance, compensating for the financial vacuum created by the withdrawal of federal grants, and coping with the expanding price tag of running a school and its programs..."With Deep Sadness" on the school's website   Some of the school's alumni and parents of current students will try to save the school, but the Board believes that the deficit is insurmountable.
Cabrini is the second Catholic school to close in two years in the Washington Heights/Inwood area, after St. Jude School.  Four other Catholic schools remain in the area.Chiwaya, Nigel. "Mother Cabrini High School to Close at End of School Year" DNAinfo New York (January 14, 2014)

==References==

Notes

==External links==


