[[Waukegan High School]]

CATEGORIES: Public high schools in Illinois, Waukegan, Illinois, Schools in Lake County, Illinois, AdvancED

Waukegan High School, or WHS, is a public, four-year high school located in Waukegan, Illinois, USA, a city to the North of Chicago, Illinois. WHS first opened its doors in 1870. Today, the Brookside Campus extends from Berwick Avenue to McAree Road, and from Brookside Avenue to the center line of Monroe Street. In an effort to accommodate approximately 4,000 students, Waukegan High School expanded to include the Washington Campus (EAST) at 1011 Washington Street. Waukegan High School is a four-year comprehensive high school that provides students with opportunities to advance their academic careers and gain an understanding of diverse cultures. Students attend classes at the Washington Campus (EAST Campus), located at 1011 Washington Street, and also at the Brookside Campus (WEST Campus), at 2325 Brookside Avenue. WHS is a closed campus which means students have to stay in the building until their last class. There are several traveling students, who travel from one campus to the other for classes. WHS is part of Waukegan Community Unit School District 60.
Between the 1975–76 school year, and the 1989–90 school year, Waukegan High School split into two completely separate  campuses.  The East (Washington) campus is considered to be one and the same as the current and previous Waukegan High School.  The West (Brookside) Campus was, during those years, a separate high school.

==Academics==

The College Studies Program allows students who are interested in college related courses to study at a faster pace than normal classes.

==Athletics==

The Waukegan Bulldogs are members of the Central Suburban League.  They also compete as a part of the Illinois High School Association (IHSA), which sponsors the state tournaments  for most of the sports and activities in the state.
During the time when Waukegan High School was split into the East and West schools, East retained the "Bulldog" nickname that had been in use, while the West school took the name "Raiders".  When the schools merged again, the traditional Bulldog name was retained, however, a pirate's eye patch was added to depictions of the bulldog to honor the "Raiders" legacy of the West campus.Waukegan HS history; accessed 11 April 2009
Waukegan sponsors the following interscholastic athletic teams for men and women:  basketball, cross country, track, swimming, golf, soccer, and volleyball. Men may compete in baseball, football,and wrestling.  Women may compete in badminton, softball, cheerleading,and tennis.  
While not sponsored by the IHSA, the school also sponsors teams in pom poms for women, and coed teams in drill team and rifle team.Waukegan HS Athletic Department; accessed 11 April 2009
The following teams have finished in the top four of their respective state championship tournaments, sponsored by the IHSA:Season Summaries for Waukegan High School; accessed 11 April 2009
The 1982–83 baseball state title, the 1983–84 4th place finish in girls golf, and the 1989–90 3rd place finish in boys track & field were won by Waukegan West High School.  The IHSA recognizes the current Waukegan High School as the caretaker of these victories.

==Notable alumni==

back to Lake County; 31 March 2007; Waukegan News Sun''[/ref]

==References==

==External links==


