[[Alan Nathan]]

CATEGORIES: Living people

Alan Nathan' is a centrist US radio talk show host and columnist.  He starts his shows with the mantra: "We want the Republicans out of our bedrooms, the Democrats out of our wallets, and both out of our First and Second Amendment rights!" and describes himself as, The Militant Moderate.  He has sometimes been labeled as libertarian.Townhall.com::Free Speech at Risk: A Free Congress Forum on the Fairness Doctrine ::By Paul Weyrich
Nathan's style is noted for its speed, skilled debate, and rigorous logic.[tpl]Citation needed|date=July 2007[/tpl]
Nathan began his career in radio as a DJ at 1480 WPWC Radio in Dumfries, VA, and it was there where he aired his first talk show, Profile and Comment With Alan Nathan.  Soon after, he adapted this program to Public-access television and caught the attention of legendary columnist and then anchor personality, Jack Anderson.  Based on Mr. Anderson's experience as a guest on "Profile and Comment", Nathan was hired as a correspondent on the Financial News Network's "Insiders With Jack Anderson."
In 1998,  Nathan started "Spanking the Left and Right," a local show on WZHF 1390 AM in the Washington, D.C. market.  He was soon picked up by the Radio America Network and became the syndicated weekend host of "Battling The Left And Right."  In 2000, that show also became a daily program and was renamed "Battle Line with Alan Nathan."
Wanting to commit more time to his columns, Nathan decided that effective September 4, 2006, he would cease "Battle Line's" daily syndication but continue its long running syndicated weekend edition.
In 2010, however, he joined forces with Main Street Radio Network, as Vice President (overseeing programming and syndication), and continued hosting the long-running “Battle Line w/Alan Nathan."  In November 2012, distribution was moved to the Salem Radio Network.
In August 2013, Alan yielded to popular request and changed the name of his program from "Battle Line with Alan Nathan" to "The Alan Nathan Show." As quoted in All Access, “They’ve been calling it the ‘ALAN NATHAN SHOW’ for years, so I learned how to take a hint.  Additionally, while there’s plenty of spirited debate (or battling) happening on the program, it’s also a guest generated, panel driven event that teases all who take themselves too seriously.”  The Show is entering its 16th year of syndication, and is aired live MON-FRI (5-7pm) with many stations delay broadcasting (8-10pm and 2-4am overnight) //SAT (6-7pm) //SUN (3-4am) ET Main Street Radio Network
Talkers Magazine rated Nathan as one of the Top 100 Talk Hosts in America for 2002, 2003 and 2005.

==Columnist==

Alan Nahan is also a contributor to several magazines and websites, including The Washington Times, Front Page Magazine, Insight on the News, WorldNetDaily, and The Examiner.

==References==

==External links==


