[['S Up]]

CATEGORIES: Bottom (TV series), 1991 television episodes

" 's Up" (short for Bottom's Up) is the fifth episode of the first series of British sitcom Bottom. It was first broadcast on Tuesday 15 October 1991.

==Synopsis==

Richie and Eddie mind their landlord's shop for him, but end up getting stuck on the rooftop after trying to watch cricket from there.

==Plot==

As the episode begins, Richie is trying to enjoy an English Sunday morning, while Eddie is trying to watch what he believes are pornographic videos. After Eddie has forced Richie to sit down to watch the film, the pair observe that the film is not particularly erotic and Richie suggests that the "Furry Honey-pot Adventure" is probably a kids film. Eddie's other purchases also turn out to be innocent - "Big Jugs" is a history of Victorian pottery and "Swedish Lesbians in Blackcurrant Jam" turns out to be "Swedish Legends in Blackcurrant Jam Making". At this point, the landlord Mr. Harrison bursts into the flat asking Richie and Eddie if they would mind his shop, so inconvenienced is he with his "stupid Mother's bloody funeral!".
In the shop, Richie demands to wear a white overcoat and make Eddie, his assistant, put his jacket on "back-to-front" so customers can see that Eddie is merely his assistant (there was no "assistant" nametag).  Mr Harrison leaves and Richie engrosses himself in the role of shopkeeper, while Eddie empties all the packets of Hula Hoops that Richard repeatedly crushes with the counter flap. Richie goes on bizarre nationalist rants, repeatedly insisting that British things are 'best in the world', and is extremely rude to every customer who enters the shop; he insults a friend of Eddie's who came to complain that his newspaper wasn't delivered. The customer wants to take the newspaper Richie is reading and beats Richie's head against the counter when Richie argues with him (Richie timidly calls "thug", to which Eddie responds "British thugs, best in the world"); an old woman who hears Richie talking to himself and inquires if he is mad; and a doctor who refers to Richie as "assistant." Richie is in desperation with the state of the nation when Eddie suggests they go up to the roof and watch cricket. Eddie sets up a bell on the door so they know when people are entering the shop.
On the roof, the pair chat before Eddie hears the bell and goes downstairs to serve a customer. Richie realizes that the roof flap cannot be opened from the outside and panics before Eddie opens the flap, hitting Richie in the face. When Eddie goes down to serve another customer Richie sets a trap where the trap door will smash Eddie's head, but the plan backfires and the hatch shuts, trapping them on the roof.  People start looting the shop and Eddie climbs down the drainpipe to stop them. Unfortunately, Richie has used the string that holds it to the roof in his trap. Eddie falls to the ground and stops the looting, then comes back to the roof. As soon as Eddie gets back up, the door slams shut and it begins to rain. The episode ends with Richie punching Eddie off the roof.

==Notes==

==Cast==

==External links==



