[[Robinson Treaty]]

CATEGORIES: First Nations history in Ontario, 1850 treaties, 1854 treaties

Robinson Treaty may refer to one of three treaties signed between the Ojibwa chiefs and The Crown.

==Lake Superior==

The Robinson Treaty for the Lake Superior region, commonly called Robinson Superior Treaty, was entered into agreement on September 7, 1850, at Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario between Ojibwa Chiefs inhabiting the Northern Shore of Lake Superior from Pigeon River to Batchawana Bay, and The Crown, represented by a delegation headed by William Benjamin Robinson.   It is registered as the Crown Treaty Number 60.

==Lake Huron (1)==

The first Robinson Treaty for the Lake Huron region, commonly called Robinson Huron Treaty, was entered into agreement on September 9, 1850, at Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario between Ojibwa Chiefs inhabiting the Northern Shore of Lake Superior from Batchawana Bay to Sault Ste. Marie and the Ojibwa Chiefs inhabiting the eastern and northern shores of Lake Huron from Sault Ste. Marie to Penetanguishene, and The Crown, represented by a delegation headed by William Benjamin Robinson.   It is registered as the Crown Treaty Number 61.

==Lake Huron (2)==

The second Robinson Treaty for the Lake Huron region, commonly called Surrender of the Saugeen Peninsula or Saugeen Surrenders, was entered into agreement on October 13, 1854, at Saugeen between Ojibwa Chiefs inhabiting the Saugeen (Bruce) Peninsula, led by Chief Waabadik, and The Crown, represented by a delegation headed by Laurence Oliphant.  It is registered as the Crown Treaty Number 72.  Though not negotiated by William Benjamin Robinson, thus not a "Robinson Treaty", it is commonly included with them. 
The Chippewas of Saugeen Ojibway Territory initially refused to relinquish entitlement of their Saugeen and Owen Sound Indian Reserve and negotiations for this land became increasingly difficult for the British government.  In the end the British government threatened that if the Ojibway did not agree The Crown would be unable to guarantee protection from the European settlers moving into the area.  After tense negotiations the Ojibway reluctantly agreed to surrender their Reserve in exchange for "the interest on the principal sum arising out of the sale of the land".  Five smaller Reserves were to be set aside in perpetuity:
The lands have been distributed to the Chippewas' successor First Nations as follows:

==References==

==External links==


