[[Baltimore County Public Library]]

CATEGORIES: Education in Baltimore County, Maryland, Libraries established in 1948, Public libraries in Maryland

Baltimore County Public Library (BCPL), established in 1948, is a public library system located in central Maryland. BCPL serves Baltimore County, Maryland, which surrounds but does not include the city of Baltimore. (Baltimore City is served by the Enoch Pratt Free Library.)
BCPL offers a wide variety of services in its branches and website. The branches offer a collection of current, high-demand print and non-print items, including books on compact discs, DVDs, and video games, as well as access to online research databases, downloadable audio books, ebooks, and much more. All branches provide public computer access and are Wi-Fi accessible. Branches offer free programs and activities for all ages.
Librarians are available at each branch to respond to the information needs of customers who walk-in or phone-in with questions. BCPL also provides Ask A Question, an email reference service and participates in the Maryland AskUsNow! chat reference service staffed 24/7 by Maryland librarians or librarians nationwide.

==Branches==

BCPL has 19 branch locations. BCPL's Mobile Library Services operates 4 bookmobiles. The branches are strategically located around Baltimore County. Baltimore County has no incorporated towns or communities. Yet the unincorporated areas have names and are considered communities by many residents despite having no clear-cut boundaries. Many of these communities have a BCPL branch located within them.
 
 

==Special collections==

===Foreign language collections===

===Legacy Web - Historic photographs===

A growing collection of more than 17,000 local historic photographs with annotations are included in Legacy Web, Baltimore County Public Library's online photo archive. The photographs cover most aspects of life in Baltimore County for the last 130 years. In April 2010, the images in the Legacy Web were added to the Baltimore County Public Library online catalog.

===Local history rooms===

The Arbutus, Catonsville, Reisterstown and Towson branches house historical archives on the local communities they serve. The local community history information may include rare and out-of-print books, newspaper clippings, and historical prints of local sites. These materials are available for in-branch use only and in some cases are accessible by appointment with the appropriate branch.

===Research databases===

BCPL provides a variety of online databases, which include information on health, business, homework topics, and test preparation. Most databases provide access to articles in magazines, newspapers, encyclopedias and more. They are useful for research, schoolwork or simply for pleasure. All databases are accessible at a Baltimore County Public Library branch and most are available from home, work or school through the Baltimore County Public Library website with a Baltimore County library card.

==History==

A complete history of BCPL is available on the Administration, Mission, History page on the BCPL website.

==Foundation for Baltimore County Public Library==

The Foundation for Baltimore County Public Library is a nonprofit organization dedicated to providing financial contributions to enhance the traditional tax-based funding for library resources, services and programming.
In 1999, based on the vision of library Director Jim Fish, the Foundation for Baltimore County Public Library was established to provide additional financial and volunteer support that were much needed. Decreased funding had occurred as a result of the economic recession of the early 1990s. Soon after, tax-exempt status was obtained, a board of directors was recruited, a president was named and raising funds began.
Foundation for BCPL Mission
The Foundation for Baltimore County Public Library mobilizes resources to support the Library's commitments.
Foundation Objectives
What the Foundation Has Accomplished
Between 1999 and 2007, the Foundation for Baltimore County Public Library has provided funding for a large number of projects appealing to the library users and library staff. Some of the largest fund-raising projects include:
Ongoing Foundation Initiative
Storyville at BCPL, designed by James Bradberry Architects, is the latest project to be funded by the Foundation for BCPL. This interactive early learning center, located at the Rosedale Branch of BCPL, hosts seven interactive play stations where infants and preschoolers can explore and grow while engaging in developmentally appropriate activities. Books and activities at each site promote cognitive, motor, language and social skills, depending on the age group.
This free, museum-like service encourages children in the greater Baltimore area and their caregivers to explore the interactive exhibits featured in a unique townscape. The townscape features a variety of innovative activity areas such as: a baby garden consisting of manipulative toys, mobiles, and board books; a fully stocked children's library; a theatre, complete with changeable marquee, costumes, and props; and other unique play and learning areas. Appropriate reading materials at different reading levels are placed at each learning area for the children.
Storyville at the Rosedale Branch has proven to be wildly successful. As of March 2010, there have been over 153,000 visitors from more than 100 ZIP codes around the region.  Indeed, just for the twenty-seven days during the month of February that Storyville was open for business, there were 7,125 visitors. Of these, 1,827 were first time visitors.
This over $700,000 project was funded through a combination of financial pledges from corporate, individual, and non-profit organizations. In addition, as part of House Bill 51, the State of Maryland's consolidated fiscal year 2007 capital budget, a $250,000 allocation was included for the benefit of the Storyville Children’s Learning Center. At the beginning of the 2007 session of the Maryland General Assembly, Senator Kathy Klausmeier (D-8-Baltimore County) introduced Senate Bill 264 and Delegate Todd Schuler (D-8-Baltimore County) introduced a corresponding bill, House Bill 360, in the House of Delegates.  These bills requested a grant of $250,000 to the Board of Directors of the Foundation for Baltimore County Public Library, Inc. for the construction of the Storyville Children’s Learning Center at the Rosedale Public Library.  The funds received under the provision of HB 51 were added to money that was raised by the Foundation for the Baltimore County Public Library from private sources and individuals to cover the construction costs.
Since the Rosedale Storyville has proven to be so popular, Baltimore County government and the Foundation for Baltimore County Public Library engaged James Bradberry Architects to design a second Storyville at the Woodlawn Branch of BCPL.  "Storyville West" opened on March 1, 2010. Having seen firsthand the positive impact that the existing Storyville has had for the community of Rosedale, it is certain that Woodlawn stands to gain a great deal through having a Storyville of its own.

==See also==

==External links==


