[[Joe Hamill]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, 1984 births, Sportspeople from Bellshill, Scottish footballers, Association football wingers, Heart of Midlothian F.C. players, Leicester City F.C. players, Livingston F.C. players, Raith Rovers F.C. players, Scottish Premier League players, Scottish Football League players, The Football League players, Queen of the South F.C. players, East Stirlingshire F.C. players

Joe Hamill (born 25 February 1984 in Bellshill) is a Scottish professional footballer currently with Formartine United in the Scottish Highland Football League.
Hamill had a spell as a teenager playing for East Stirlingshire Boys Club until he joined the youth development scheme at Hearts, graduating from there to the youth academy in 2000. Known as a hard working and tricky winger, he was promoted in April 2002 to the first team squad after major roles in the Under-18's and Under-21's. He was featured in the side that won Youth League championship in season 2000–01.
Hamill was on the fringes of the first team squad in season 2002–03, however during the following season he started to play more games for the first team, making 20 competitive appearances. He also obtained a massive confidence boost when, in May 2004, he scored the only goal in a SPL match against Rangers at Ibrox.
During the 2004–2005 season, Hamill gained competitive European experience by playing during the Tynecastle outfit's UEFA Cup campaign. He also scored the winner in the Edinburgh derby against Hibernian in the same week his manager Craig Levein quit the club to go take charge of Leicester City in the Championship.
In August 2005, Hamill was signed by his former Hearts boss Craig Levein for Leicester, joining former Jambo team-mates Mark de Vries, Alan Maybury and Patrick Kisnorbo. He scored his first goal for the club after 37 minutes of his debut in a League Cup defeat of Bury and made his league debut a week later, coming off the bench in the 1–1 draw away to Hull City.
On 28 July 2006, it was announced that Hamill had parted ways with Leicester City after just 11 months at the club, having his contract terminated by mutual consent. His then manager Rob Kelly, who had replaced Levein in early 2006, said that Hamill had left the club to seek first team football elsewhere. He also said Hamill was a smashing lad and never caused an ounce of trouble at the club.
On 2 August 2006, he joined Livingston on a free transfer.
On 29 January 2010, Dumfries club Queen of the South confirmed that Hamill had signed with Steve Tosh moving in the opposite direction in a loan deal.
On 1 June 2011, Kirkcaldy club Raith Rovers signed Hamill on a 2-year contract.Extension Granted & Midfielder Signs
On 8 May 2013, it was confirmed that Hamill had been released.Players to be released

==References==

==External links==


