[[Scar Tissue (book)]]

CATEGORIES: 2004 books, Music autobiographies

Scar Tissue is the autobiography of Red Hot Chili Peppers vocalist Anthony Kiedis. It was released in 2004 by Hyperion and authored by Kiedis with Larry Sloman, who compiled information and interviewed various parties associated with the plot line. The story follows Kiedis from his birth in 1962 to the (then) present day of early 2004. It follows Kiedis into the depth of his experiences with drug addiction. The title name was taken from the single "Scar Tissue" released five years earlier on the Red Hot Chili Peppers album Californication.
According to the book, Kiedis' first drug experience was with his father Blackie Dammett, a former drug dealer, at age eleven. By the time his band formed and became more popular in the 1980s, he and former bandmate Hillel Slovak had severe drug addictions. On Slovak's death from overdose in 1988, Kiedis writes that he was so shaken that he skipped town, missing the funeral. Kiedis had no idea what to do without his friend. His death only made matters worse, and caused him to do more and more hardcore drugs.Kiedis, Anthony. Scar Tissue. 1st ed. New York: New York, 2004. 50-52. Print. He attempted to get clean afterwards but relapsed in 1994 after being given medications while getting a tooth pulled.  Later on, he reveals that he was not actually clean, as he claimed at the time, during the late-nineties Californication era of the band's existence. He claims his new clean date is December 24, 2000. The book reports very specific dates, such as when Kiedis was conceived.
The book reached a high of #1 on The New York Times Best Seller List.
Kiedis is working to develop a television series for HBO based on Scar Tissue.
On October 14, 2011 it was announced that FX has picked up the rights to produce Scar Tissue and that Entourage producers, Marc Abrams and Mike Benson will produce the series. The series is expected to follow the first half of the book during Anthony's pre teen and teenage years and his relationship with his father Blackie.http://www.cinemablend.com/television/Anthony-Kiedis-Scar-Tissue-Moves-From-HBO-FX-36054.html
An audiobook version was released by Phoenix Audio on June 30, 2006. It was read by Rider Strong.

==References==


