[[A Secret History... The Best of the Divine Comedy]]

CATEGORIES: The Divine Comedy (band) compilation albums, 1999 greatest hits albums, Setanta Records compilation albums

A Secret History... The Best of The Divine Comedy is a greatest hits compilation album by The Divine Comedy, released in 1999.
The album was the last to be released by the band on the Setanta Records label, and featured a collection of singles and best-known songs from the previous five studio albums. Re-recordings of "The Pop Singer's Fear of the Pollen Count" and "Your Daddy's Car" were included, along with two new tracks, "Gin Soaked Boy" and "Too Young to Die". The Noël Coward tribute recording of "I've Been To A Marvellous Party" was also included.
A limited release edition was available with an accompanying hard-back book and extra CD. The book featured Kevin Westenburg photographs taken from previous album photo shoots interspersed with the recollections of people who had worked closely with the band. Graham Linehan and Sean Hughes were among the contributors.
The additional CD, Rarities, featured a whole album's worth of rare, live and demo recordings, including cover versions of tracks by David Bowie, Talk Talk and Kraftwerk. Of special interest was the inclusion of the demo of a track from the band's debut album, Fanfare for the Comic Muse, an album which had previously been all-but ignored from the back catalogue.

==Track listing==

All songs written by Neil Hannon except for "I've Been to a Marvellous Party", written by Noël Coward and "The Certainty of Chance", written by Neil Hannon and Joby Talbot.
Limited Edition Rarities CD
All songs written by Neil Hannon except for "Dear Lord and Father of Mankind", Traditional, "Life on Mars?", written by David Bowie, "The Model", written by Ralf Hütter, Karl Bartos & Emil Schult, "Life's What You Make It", by Mark Hollis and Tim Friese-Greene and "Moon River", by Johnny Mercer and Henry Mancini.
"Painting the Forth Bridge" is an early version of "Middle Class Heroes", featuring completely different lyrics.

==References==


