[[Vijay Stambha]]

CATEGORIES: History of Rajasthan, Towers in India, Monuments and memorials in Rajasthan, Visitor attractions in Chittorgarh district, Victory monuments

Vijay Stambha (Hindi: विजय स्तम्भ) or "Tower of Victory" is an imposing structure located in Chittorgarh fort in Rajasthan, India. This tower is the piece-de-resistance of Chittaurgarh. It was constructed by  Mewar king  Rana Kumbha between 1442 AD and 1449 AD to commemorate his victory over the combined armies of Malwa and Gujarat led by Mahmud Khilji.
Dedicated to Vishnu,this 37.19 m high 9 storied tower is one of the most remarkable in India. It is built partly of red sand stone and partly of white marble and is enriched by numerous images of Hindu gods and goddesses with inscriptions at bottom of each. It is believed that the tower took 10 years to be completed. This exemplary piece of architecture stands on a pedestal 10 feet high. Each of the nine stories are distinctly marked with openings and balconies at every face of each story. The interior staircase winds alternately through the central chamber and surrounding gallery.
The inscribed slabs in the uppermost story contains genealogy of the rulers of Chittaur from Hamir to Rana Kumbha. The entire tower is covered with architectural ornaments and inscribed images of gods and goddesses, seasons, weapons, musical instruments, etc. Its inscribed sculpture are a veritable text-book of Hindu iconography. The portraits of the architect of this tower Jaita and his 3 sons, Napa, Puja, and Poma are carved on the fifth floor of the tower. There are around 157 narrow steps leading to the terrace from where one can have a beautiful view of Chittorgarh town and the fort. The uppermost floor has been sealed off and is no longer accessible to visitors.
The Jain Kirti Stambha in the fort dates from the 13th century and is thus about two centuries older.
The tower is said to be the home of the Á Bao A Qu, as described in the Book of Imaginary Beings by Jorge Luis Borges.

==Gallery==

File:Tower of Victory in the Fort.jpg|The tower in 1885
File:Victory tower.jpg|The tower
File:Stamaba views with other relics steroscopic view.jpg|Vijaya Stamaba with other relics stereoscopic view
File:Vijaya Stambha.jpg|An old photo of the Vijaya Stambha (1882)
File:Vijaya Stambha in 1870s.jpg|The tower in 1870's
File:Vijaya Stambha - Chittorgarh.jpg|An old sketch of the tower (1878)
File:Old Photo of the famous Vijaya Stambha.jpg|Old photo of the Tower of Victory (1852)
File:Tower of Victory (Watercolour Painting).jpg|Water colour painting of the tower (1878)

==See also==


