[[Ocala Union Station]]

CATEGORIES: Railway stations on the National Register of Historic Places in Florida, Buildings and structures in Ocala, Florida, National Register of Historic Places in Marion County, Florida, Former Amtrak stations in Florida, Atlantic Coast Line Railroad stations, Seaboard Air Line Railroad stations, Union stations in the United States, Bus stations in Florida, Amtrak Thruway Motorcoach stations in Florida, Historic Florida architecture 1989 AIA survey listings in Marion County

The Ocala Union Station (also known as Union Station Plaza) is a historic site in Ocala, Florida, United States. It is located at 531 Northeast First Avenue, and was built in 1917 by both the Atlantic Coast Line and Seaboard Air Line Railroads. Prior to this, ACL and SAL had separate depots in Ocala. The former ACL station was originally built by the Florida Southern Railroad, while the former SAL station was built by the Florida Transit and Peninsular Railroad.Mulligan, M.: "Railroad Depots of Central Florida", pages 40, 84, 117-119.  Arcadia Publishing, 2008. On December 22, 1997, it was added to the U.S. National Register of Historic Places.
The station served as a stop for Amtrak's Palmetto service until 2004, using the Seaboard Air Line's former tracks, now part of the Wildwood Subdivision, a segment of the CSX S-Line. The former Atlantic Coast Line tracks are now part of Florida Northern Railroad. Currently Amtrak offers exclusive coach service from the station twice a day:  one run to connect to the Silver Star (Amtrak train) in Lakeland and another run connecting to the Silver Star (Amtrak train) again in Jacksonville. There are several intermediate stops in each direction.
Greyhound and Ocala's SunTran bus service still use the station to this day.  The Shuttleliner limo/van service offers several trips daily to Orlando International Airport from the station.

==Gallery==

File:Ocalaunionstation2.jpg|View from the front of the station.
File:Ocalaunionstation sign1.jpg|Sign for the station.

==References==

==External links==


