[[Pussycat Dolls Present]]

CATEGORIES: The CW Television Network shows, American reality television series, Television series by Warner Bros. Television, 2007 American television series debuts, 2008 American television series endings, 2000s American television series, The Pussycat Dolls

The Pussycat Dolls Present is an American reality TV series that premiered on March 6, 2007 on The CW, and took place over the course of eight weeks. It was a joint venture between Ken Mok's 10 by 10 Entertainment, Pussycat LLC, and Warner Horizon Television.

==Overview==

The series followed a group of young women as they went through an audition process to join the pop/R&B girl group, the Pussycat Dolls. The contestants, who also lived together during the course of the series, were groomed by the group's founder and the series' creator and co-producer, Robin Antin, and were judged on their vocal and dancing ability. Outside of stage performances, the contestants experience choreography, song recording and tensions together.
First season winner Asia Nitollano went on to join the Pussycat Dolls as the act's seventh member, and appeared in the series but performed with the group only once on the show since after opting to go solo before the series premiered. Third placer Chelsea Korka however joined a new Robin Antin group called the Paradiso Girls.
Second season winner Girlicious (Nichole Cordova, Tiffanie Anderson, Chrystina Sayers and Natalie Mejia) were originally set to be a trio, but decided by the judges and Antin to become a quartet instead. Girlicious immediately started filming music videos and recording songs after the filming wrapped in the summer.
In the United Kingdom, the show started airing on T4 (the Channel 4 weekend teenage block programming slot) on April 1, 2007. In Australia, the show debuted on Network Ten on April 1, 2007.
The second season, titled Pussycat Dolls Present: Girlicious, premiered Monday, February 18, 2008.Breaking News – CW Plans Midseason Makeover | TheFutonCritic.com Pussycat Dolls Present: moved to its new night and time beginning Wednesday, April 9 after America's Next Top Model.Breaking News – The Cw Network Locks In Midseason Schedule With New Episodes And New Time Periods | Thefutoncritic.Com
The format of the program is more casual (like ANTM) than other talent-based reality shows. Elements in the program include stylish camera shots, original hip hop beats and unique interactions among the contestants. Each season is shot during the summer and aired nearly a year after shooting.
On May 13, 2008, the series was officially cancelled by The CW.Shows A-Z – pussycat dolls present: girlicious on cw | TheFutonCritic.com The third season was planned to have a new girl group with a style of Hip-Hop and Rapcore, similar to Pink's style.

==Purpose==

The show is much like a music oriented America's Next Top Model as it features challenge, in-house "drama" and follows the girls inside the house. Just like in its sister show, the girls are all called out in a special order based on their performances, except for the last two who are asked to step forward and criticized more extensively before being told which one is going home.
The girls' performances are always held on stage in the The Pussycat Lounge, founded by Antin and PCD. The performances in the lounge are not opened to the public, but for the judges and associates.
The first season featured 18 semi-finalists cut down to nine finalists who got into the mansion. Each week one of them was told to "hang up (her) boa, (as she would) not be the next Pussycat Doll" by Robin Antin based on talent as well as much speculated image criteria. The winner, Asia Nitollano, decided not to join the group and go solo after only a few weeks, leading fans to speculate about whether or not she did it willingly.
The second season featured 15 semi-finalists cut down to 12 finalists. This time three slots were open as the goal was to create yet another Robin Antin group called Girlicious. Every week the girls would have to live up to the theme of the week. After performances one girl would have to "hang up (her) boa, as (she) would not be in Girlicious," told by Robin. The winners were Nichole Cordova, Tiffanie Anderson, Natalie Mejia, and Chrystina Sayers. Second Runner-up Carrie Jones was offered a solo deal with Interscope Records but opted to join the group Angels of Modern Destruction, while other contestant Jamie Lee Ruiz joined the Vegas Dolls.

==Personalities==

Mark McGrath is the Master of Ceremonies during the contestants' performances and the sneak peek of the proceeding episode.
Each show contestants perform at the Pussycat Dolls Lounge, consisting of singing and dancing. Based on the stagework, three judges determine the weakest performer, whom they eliminate. The first week the judges were vocal coach Eric Dawkins, choreographer Mikey Minden who would recur throughout the show as well as main judge Robin Antin and Pussycat Doll Nicole Scherzinger. The three judges during all other performances are Robin Antin, Lil' Kim, and Ron Fair. In season 2 however Eric Dawkins was replaced by Kenn Hicks and Dave Audé has been added to the coaches. Furthermore the three judges selected the finalists from the semi-finalists as well.
Unlike Lil' Kim and Ron Fair, Robin Antin examines occasionally, she assists choreographer Mikey Minden with the dance choreography with the wardrobe personnel prior to the girls' performances. Announced by host McGrath as the most popular female rap artist, Lil' Kim also appears at the lounge. President of Geffen Records, Ron Fair shares similar responsibilities as Lil' Kim.
After the performances they provide their thoughts about them afterwards, and discuss it in private to make their decision. When the judges reach consensus on who will be eliminated, Antin is the one who makes the announcement. She makes a recurring statement to the loser: "It's time to hang up your boa, you will not be the next Pussycat Doll/you will not be in Girlicious." However, Fair is often noted for criticizing the vocal aspects of the performances, while Kim seems to be more keen on comparing the rendition with her feelings on the original song and Antin compares the girl to what she seeks in a Pussycat Doll.

==Season 1: The Search for the Next Doll==

==Season 2: Girlicious==

The Pussycat Dolls Present: Girlicious was the second season of Pussycat Dolls Present, in which young aspiring female singers/dancers compete in order to claim their spots to become the group Girlicious.

==International airings==

==Footnotes and references==

==External links==


