[[Nenagh Ormond]]

CATEGORIES: Irish rugby union teams, Sport in North Tipperary, Rugby clubs established in 1884, Sports clubs established in 1884, Nenagh

Nenagh Ormond RFC is an Irish Rugby union club based in Nenagh, North Tipperary. It was founded in 1884 as The Ormond Cricket and Football Club. The club plays in Division 2A of the All-Ireland League and was County Tipperarys first ever senior grade rugby club.  The club's main ground is New Ormond Park with another ground in Tyone where underage teams can train and play.
The club fields 2 adult sides and 10 underage sides, from u7 to u20, that compete in blitzes with neighbouring clubs in Tipperary and Limerick as well as further afield at u7-u12 levels while from u13-20 level Nenagh competes in East Munster competitions and Munster competitions.
The club also fields a Women's side and girl's underage sides.
The club joined the senior ranks in 2005 when they won the round robin and spent their first ten seasons as a senior club in the bottom division of the All Ireland League. In the 2013/2014 season under the coaching team of Derek Corcoran and Trevor Hogan the club won Division 2B of the All Ireland League and retained the Munster Senior Plate which had been won for the first time in December 2012 with a win over Dolphin in Mahon, Cork. In 2014 Nenagh beat Young Munster by 74 points to 7 to win a third competition in the senior ranks.
Nenagh Ormond has produced three Irish full-internationals as well as several players who either played for Munster in the amateur era or played professionally for an Irish province or in England. Tony Courtney (1899 - 1970) with seven caps, Trevor Hogan (formerly Munster and Leinster) who won three caps made his debut against Japan in 2005 and Donnacha Ryan (Munster) who has won twenty eight so far making his debut in 2008 against Argentina in Croke Park, Dublin. Ray Hogan played professionally with Connacht and David Delaney played professionally with Plymouth

==Club honours==

==External links==


