[[American Association of State Colleges and Universities]]

CATEGORIES: American Association of State Colleges and Universities, Organizations established in 1951, College and university associations and consortia in the United States, 1951 establishments in the United States

The American Association of State Colleges and Universities (AASCU) is an organization of state-supported colleges and universities that offer degree programs leading to bachelor's, master's or doctoral degrees.Strategic plan: Governing ideas, American Association of State Colleges and Universities, Washington, DC, 2014, Retrieved 16 February 2014. AASCU grew out of the Association of Teacher Education Institutions that had been organized in 1951 to serve public comprehensive institutions. Most of the original member institutions began as single purpose institutions, most commonly normal schools. 
Members of AASCU work to extend higher education to all citizens, including those who have been traditionally underrepresented on college campuses. By delivering America’s promise by being stewards of education,President to presidents 2011: The AASCU edge, AASCU, Washington, DC: AASCU, February 2012, Koester, J., Retrieved 17 February 2014. these institutions fulfill the expectations of a public university by working for the public good through education and engagement, thereby improving the lives of people in their community, their region and their state. The American Association of State Colleges and Universities represents nearly 420 public colleges, universities and systems of higher education throughout the United States and its territories.List of AASCU Member Institutions, AASCU, Washington, DC: AASCU, 2014, Retrieved 18 February 2014.
AASCU's current president is Muriel A. Howard, former president of Buffalo State College and a former vice president of the University of Buffalo.History: College presidents: Muriel A. Howard, Buffalo State College: The State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, 2013, accessdate=11 December 2013.About us: President's bio: Muriel A. Howard, Ph.D., AASCU - American Association of Colleges and Universities, Washington, DC, 2013, Retrieved 12 December 2013.Vice president at UB will head Buffalo State, Buffalo News, Buffalo, NY: Berkshire Hathaway, 12 December 1995, Brady, K., Retrieved 21 December 2013.Muriel A. Howard - working for a better community, Living Prime Time, December 2000, Binder, J., Retrieved 13 January 2014.

==Purpose==

AASCU has a fivefold purpose, as follows:

==Public policy agenda==

AASCU's public policy agenda focuses on promoting four general principles, including the following:

==Major projects==

In 1998, AASCU's African American presidents came together to start the Millennium Leadership Initiative (MLI) — a program that prepares individuals traditionally underrepresented in the highest ranks of higher education for future leadership roles, particularly college and university presidencies.Millennium leadership institute, AASCU, Washington, DC: AASCU, 2011, Retrieved 18 February 2014. MLI involves both a four-day intensive program and a yearlong partnership between a protégé and a mentor, who is a current or former president or chancellor. MLI grooms the protégés for leadership by helping them to develop the skills, gain a philosophical overview, and build a network necessary to advance to the presidency.
In 2003, AASCU partnered with the New York Times to found the American Democracy Project (ADP).American democracy project: About ADP, AASCU, Washington, DC: AASCU, 2014, Retrieved 18 February 2014. With over 220 member institutions, ADP is a multi-campus initiative focused on higher education’s role in preparing graduates to become the next generation of informed, engaged citizens who are committed to being active, involved members of their communities. ADP has furthered this goal through five national and 11 regional meetings, in addition to a national assessment project, campus audits, speaker series, and recognition and award series.  Further, it has sponsored specific days of action and reflection, and several campus initiatives, including voter registration and education, and curriculum revision and projects.  To promote civic education and awareness, ADP has also sponsored the Civic Engagement in Action Series.
In 2006, AASCU and the National Association of State Universities and Land-Grant Colleges (NASULGC) began joint development of a Voluntary System of Accountability (VSA) for public 4-year colleges and universities.Voluntary system of accountability, Voluntary System of Accountability, 2011, Retrieved 17 February 2014. This project is a response to the call by the Spellings Commission for increased accountability in higher education.Secretary Spellings announces new commission on the future of higher education, ED.gov - U.S. Department of Education, Washington, DC, 19 September 2005, Babyak, S. & Glickman, J., Retrieved 17 February 2014. Following a national call for nominations, more than 90 people were appointed by the presidents of AASCU and NASULGC to work on this project. More information about VSA is available on the AASCU website.  An important feature of this project is a high transparency design. Interested parties are invited to comment on the work of VSA while it is in progress. Forums have been established to facilitate this design.
In 2010, AASCU launched First Generations Voices.First generation voices: Share your stories, AASCU, Washington, DC: AASCU, 2014, Retrieved 18 February 2014. First Generation Voices is a multimedia project highlighting the stories of first generation college students at AASCU member campuses. The stories, which can be submitted as audio, video or written narratives, are featured on the AASCU website, along with biographical information about the students and their institutions.
In 2013, AASCU President Howard voiced support for comprehensive immigration reform.Why comprehensive immigration reform is a must for higher ed, Huffington Post, 11 April 2013, Howard, M., Retrieved 29 January 2014.  She has stated support for the Pass the Dream Act, for enhancing H1-B Visas, and for streamlining green cards.  She stated that all of these actions will support students in America who are undocumented, and will help maintain American competitiveness, as well as keeping "talent...at home."

==Publications==

==Membership==

There are nearly 420 member institutions.
See: List of members of the American Association of State Colleges and Universities

==References==

==External links==


