[[Bob Holiday]]

CATEGORIES: American male musical theatre actors, Living people, 1932 births

Bob Holiday (born 1932) in an American actor best known for playing Superman in the 1966 Broadway musical It's a Bird, It's a Plane, It's Superman! Historically, Holiday was the next "live-action" Superman after George Reeves. Holiday has played Superman more than any other actor, having played the role in over 140 performances, as well as several live appearances in character. He is also the eldest surviving, live-action Superman.

==Superman==

Holiday had the title role in the 1966 musical. According to author Bruce Scivelli, "Holiday remained in his Superman costume after the matinees and invited the kids backstage for autographs. Towering over his young fans, the 6-foot-4-inch actor signed their programs and admonished them to drink their milk and be good.""Dallas Theater Center's Kevin Moriarty rescues a singing Man of Steel from his Fortress of Solitude.", Dallas Observer, June 10, 2010 Despite excellent reviews and Tony nominations for co-stars Jack Cassidy,20th Tony Awards Michael O'Sullivan and Patricia Marand,"Patricia Marand, Tony-Nominated Star of It's a Bird…, Dies at 74", Playbill, November 30, 2008 the show closed after 129 performances. 
In 1967 he reprised the role of Superman in two separate revivals. These revivals took place in open-air theatres, requiring Superman to fly with the help of a large crane. During the heyday of "It's a Bird It's a Plane It's Superman!" he appeared as Superman in ads for UniRoyal and Aqua Velva, and made personal appearances on "I've Got A Secret," "The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson", and at the Sixth International Fashion Show held at Macy's in New York City.
On March 23, 2013, Holiday attended the New York City Centre revival of the show and met with the cast.http://broadwayworld.com/article/Photo-Flash-Original-Broadway-Superman-Bob-Holiday-Visits-Encores-ITS-A-BIRDITS-A-PLANEITS-SUPERMAN-20130324#
After 40 years, he still enjoys hearing from fans of the show. In 2003, he celebrated his time as Superman at the annual Metropolis Superman Celebration in Illinois.

==Other activities==

Holiday appeared previously on Broadway in Fiorello! opposite Tom Bosley. He also starred as Sir Lancelot in the 1964 touring company of Camelot opposite Howard Keel. 
After leaving show business, Holiday opened Bob Holiday Custom Homes, LLC. He spent 30 years as a successful home builder in the Pocono Mountains, and retired in 2009.

==References==

==External links==


