[[Matt Nickerson]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, American ice hockey defencemen, Ässät players, Clarkson Golden Knights men's ice hockey players, Dallas Stars draft picks, Idaho Steelheads players, Ilves players, Iowa Stars players, Living people, Malmö Redhawks players, Springfield Falcons players, Victoriaville Tigres players

Matt Nickerson (born January 11, 1985, in Old Lyme, Connecticut, U.S.) is a professional ice hockey defenceman currently playing with the Fife Flyers.

==Playing career==

Nickerson played for the Texas Tornado of the North American Hockey League during the 2001–02 and 2002–03 seasons. It was during his final season with the team that Nickerson drew the attention of NHL scouts, and in the 2003 NHL Entry Draft the Dallas Stars drafted Nickerson in the third round with the 99th overall pick. Nickerson spent his next season at Clarkson University, where he racked up 179 penalty minutes in 38 games. Nickerson signed a three year entry level contract before playing in Victoriaville. Due to the NHL lockout, he was sent to the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League's Victoriaville Tigres, and finally turned pro in the Finnish SM-liiga, playing with Ässät.
Started 2005-2006 in the Dallas Stars training camp where he scored a goal on Ty Conklin in a NHL exhibition game verse the Edmonton Oilers. Nickerson was then assigned to Iowa of the AHL where he played 4 exhibition games,registering one fighting major, before ending up in Pori, Finland. In his first season with Ässät, Nickerson broke the league record for penalty minutes in the regular season, with 236 total.Matt Nickerson palaa Poriin - SM-LIIGA - 09.10.2006 - Uutiset - Jatkoaika.com - Kaikki jääkiekosta He was assessed a match penalty for fighting in October 2005,Laatikaiselle kaksi ottelua pannaa, muut selvisivät ilman lisäsanktioita - SM-LIIGA - 17.10.2005 - Uutiset - Jatkoaika.com - Kaikki jääkiekosta and was suspended for three games for fighting and unsportsmanlike conduct on November 2, 2005.Nickersonille kolmen ottelun panna, Ässille sakot - SM-LIIGA - 11.11.2005 - Uutiset - Jatkoaika.com - Kaikki jääkiekosta
After his first stint in SM-liiga Nickerson returned to North America for the 2006–07 season and played for the Idaho Steelheads of the ECHL and the Iowa Stars of the AHL, both affiliates of the Dallas Stars. He earned a 16 game suspension during his 12 games in Idaho. After a season in North America, Nickerson returned to Pori and joined Ässät for the second time in his career. On October 20, 2007, he was suspended for three games for attacking TPS forward Teemu Laine.Nickersonille kolmen ottelun huili - SM-LIIGA - 22.10.2007 - Uutiset - Jatkoaika.com - Kaikki jääkiekosta While serving this suspension, he attacked Ilves defenceman Kevin Kantee in the locker room area of the Ässät arena on October 27, receiving an additional five-game suspension.Nickersonille pelikielto, Ässille sakot - SM-LIIGA - 30.10.2007 - Uutiset - Jatkoaika.com - Kaikki jääkiekosta Nickerson has turned out to be a fan favourite in Pori during his stints in Finland. In February 2008 Nickerson was transferred from Ässät to Ilves. On February 4, he received a match penalty for fighting in the Ilves-Blues game.Jääkiekko - MTV3.fi
For the 2009-2010 season, he signed with the Edmonton Oilers organization but played just 19 games for the AHL's Springfield Falcons and was released without ever playing for the Oilers. Nickerson had a try-out with Danish team Esbjerg IK in November 2010 but failed to secure a contract. 
The Fife Flyers confirmed the signing of Matt Nickerson for the 2013/14 Rapid Solicitors Elite Ice Hockey League season.
Nickerson quickly became a fan favourite at Fife where his tough edge added some much needed backbone to a team which had been bullied on the ice in the past. Playing 45 games in his first season he was an integral part in the run to the EIHL playoff semi final game where Fife lost to Belfast by 1-0. His unending desire to stand up for his team mates earned great respect from the Fife support although he did draw the attention of the EIHL referees and in December 2013 he was handed a 12 game suspension (which was reduced upon appeal) for a fight during a game against the Braehead Clan. 
As part of the Fife Flyers community outreach program Nickerson and fellow team mates visited the children's hospice in Kinross operated by C.H.A.S. Touched by the work carried out by the charity Nickerson offered to let fans shave off his impressive trademark beard to raise money for the hospice. This charitable act received many plaudits from across the UK hockey community.

==Career statistics==

==External links==

==References==


