[[Bo Perasol]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Filipino basketball coaches, Filipino basketball players, Philippine Basketball Association coaches, University of the Philippines alumni

Dolreich "Bo" Perasol is a  Filipino basketball coach. He coaches in both collegiate and professional leagues. He is the head coach the Ateneo De Manila University Blue Eagles, a collegiate team in the UAAP.

==About==

Bo Perasol was a former player and team captain of the UP Fighting Maroons in the UAAP from the year 1990-1995. He is among the few athletes of the premiere university who actually passed the UP College Admission Test, a rigorous entrance examination given to high school students in the Philippines. He graduated with a degree in Mass Communications in the year 1994 in the same university. After his stint at the university, he became the coach for the UP Fighting Maroons Juniors, which became his training ground as a coach, before making his PBA coaching debut with Air21 in the 2005-06 PBA season.

==Air21 Express head coach==

In the 2005-06 season, Perasol replaced Bong Ramos as head coach of the Air21 Express, previously named as the FedEx Express. Many expected Air21 to drop as low as last place in the season and had a bulky yet untested import Shawn Daniels for the Fiesta Conference.
In the 2005-06 PBA Fiesta Conference, Perasol and the Express became the surprise team of the tournament. Air21 finished fifth in the classification phase but pulled huge upsets over the San Miguel Beermen and the Talk 'N Text Phone Pals in the Wild-Card and Quarterfinal rounds, respectively. The Express lost in six games to the Purefoods Chunkee Giants in the semifinals, but won a one-game match for third-place over the Barangay Ginebra Kings, their best finish in franchise history.
Despite Air21's poor finish in the 2006 PBA Philippine Cup, the Express were able to finish off strong in the classification phase after star player Ren-Ren Ritualo was traded to Talk 'N Text.
Perasol's system follow the same philosophy of the Air21 management, relying on a 12 man rotation and a run-and-gun type of basketball system.
In 2009, he resigned as Air21 head coach despite leading Air21 to runner-up finish.

==Coca-Cola Tigers basketball operations manager==

He was named Kenneth Duremdes' assistant coach and director of basketball operations for the Coca-Cola Tigers. He took over as head coach on November 2009 when Duremdes filed his candidacy for a local position in Marbel, South Cotabato.

==External links==


