[[Miguel Ángel Lozano]]

CATEGORIES: 1978 births, Living people, People from Sabadell, Spanish footballers, Catalan footballers, Association football midfielders, La Liga footballers, Segunda División footballers, Segunda División B footballers, Tercera División footballers, CE Sabadell footballers, FC Barcelona C footballers, FC Barcelona B footballers, Levante UD footballers, Málaga CF footballers, Real Betis footballers, Gimnàstic de Tarragona footballers, SD Ponferradina footballers, CF Badalona footballers, CD Castellón footballers, Terrassa FC footballers

Miguel Ángel Lozano Ayala, known as Miguel Ángel (born 16 September 1978), is a Spanish footballer who plays for CF Caldes Montbui as a defensive midfielder.
Over the course of eight seasons he amassed La Liga totals of 206 games and eight goals, namely representing Málaga (five years, two spells). He played in the UEFA Champions League with Betis.

==Club career==

Born in Sabadell, Barcelona, Catalonia, Miguel Ángel began his career at hometown's CE Sabadell FC, where he played during the 1995–96 season in the third division. He moved to neighbours FC Barcelona in 1996, spending some time with its C and B-teams.
In the 1999 summer Ángel signed for Levante UD, where he spent two years playing in the second level. In 2001–02 he "upgraded" to Málaga CF, being a key element in midfield during his five-year stay, scoring seven La Liga goals and helping the club to the 2002 UEFA Intertoto Cup.
For the 2005–06 campaign Miguel Ángel was transferred to Andalusia neighbours Real Betis in a deal worth €2 million, signing a five-year contract with the club.Betis make Miguel Ángel move; UEFA.com, 1 August 2005 In his first season he suffered knee ligament damage in a UEFA Champions League group stage match against Chelsea at Stamford Bridge, which Betis lost 0–4.Miguel Ángel nightmare for Betis; UEFA.com, 20 October 2005
In July 2007 Ángel returned to Levante, playing out 2007–08 on a one-year loan. At the end of the season he was released, and returned to Málaga. After being relatively used in the first season in his second spell he was loaned to Gimnàstic de Tarragona for the following campaign, in division two.
On 13 July 2010, Miguél Ángel was released by Málaga. Two weeks later, at nearly 32, he signed a one-year contract with SD Ponferradina, freshly returned to the second division;Miguel Ángel, otro refuerzo de lujo para la ‘Ponfe’ (Miguel Ángel, another deluxe signing for ‘Ponfe’); Marca, 29 July 2010 [tpl]es icon[/tpl] in the following transfer window, however, he was released.

==Honours==

==References==

==External links==


