[[Danny Maseng]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Year of birth missing (living people), Israeli songwriters, Israeli male singers, Jewish composers and songwriters, Place of birth missing (living people)

Don Tourliev "Danny" Maseng is an Israeli-born performer. An actor, singer and writer, Maseng is known as a composer of contemporary Jewish Liturgical music. He currently serves as the Cantor and Musical Director of Temple Israel of Hollywood.

==Biography==

Maseng was born in Tel Aviv, Israel to an American Jewish mother and a Norwegian-American Lutheran father who came to Israel to serve as a volunteer in the Air Force during Israel's War of Independence and later converted to Judaism.http://www.jweekly.com/article/full/12505/actor-memorializes-grandfather-in-one-man-show/ Maseng rose to stardom in Israel at a young age and was the star of one of the first TV shows in Israel. Maseng came to America in 1971JewishJournal.com to star on Broadway in the musical Only Fools are Sad under the patronage of Golda Meir. 
After his Broadway run, Maseng remained in the States, living in several cities before becoming a practicing Buddhist and student of the late Dainin Katagiri Roshi in Minneapolis. He later found his way back to Judaism and became involved in the Reform Judaism movement through the Olin Sang Ruby Union Institute, where he ran the Tiferet Arts program for eight years.
Maseng resides with his wife in Los Angeles, California. He has three sons, Jonathan, Carmel and Jordan.

==Theater, music and television career==

Maseng directed and starred in productions in Minneapolis, including Cold Storage and The Day they Shot John Lennon for the Genesis Theater; The Secret Rapture and Rat in the Skull with British Actor Richard Lumsden for the Theater Exchange; and the Minnesota Opera's production of Carousel (musical).
After returning to New York in the early 1990s, Maseng had roles in the Circle Repertory Company's production of A Body of Water and starred as Da Costa in the revival of the Broadway Musical King of Schnorrers in Los Angeles at the then "Westwood" now Geffen Playhouse. 
In 1995, Maseng debuted his critically acclaimed one man show Wasting Time with Harry Davidowitz at the John Houseman Theater off-broadway, where it enjoyed a long run and has since toured with it abroad.
Maseng has released a dozen albums and appeared as a guest star on numerous television shows including many of the shows in the Law & Order franchise, Wild Discovery and One Life to Live; and has also done extensive voice-over work for JoS. A. Bank, American Express, Hewlett Packard and Hoehn Motors.

==Jewish career==

In addition to his performing and composing, Maseng helped found and run the Steven Spielberg Theater Fellowships for the Foundation for Jewish Camping and also served as the Artistic Director of the Brandeis-Bardin Institute in California. He is also the founding director of the Jewish Arts Institute, a program run out of the Isabella Freedman Jewish Retreat Center in Falls Village, Connecticut.
For several years, Maseng served as the spiritual leader for Congregation Agudas Achim in Livingston Manor, New York. He later served as the Artist-In-Residence/Cantor for Temple Israel of Columbus in Ohio. He currently is the Chazzan and Music Director of Temple Israel of Hollywood in Los Angeles.
In 2007, Maseng was appointed the Patron Artist of the Jewish Institute of Cantorial Arts at the University of Potsdam in Germany, the first cantorial school in Germany since the Holocaust.The World Union for Progressive Judaism | Our Newsletter

==References==

==External links==


