[[Geography of Zimbabwe]]

CATEGORIES: Geography of Zimbabwe

Zimbabwe is a landlocked country in southern Africa lying while within the tropics. It straddles an extensive high inland plateau that drops northwards to the Zambezi valley where the border with Zambia is and similarly drops southwards to the Limpopo valley and the border with South Africa. 
The country has borders with Botswana 813 km, Mozambique 1,231 km, South Africa 225 km, Zambia 797 km and meets Namibia at its westernmost point.

==Area==

It is the 61st largest country in the world (although below average size for Africa) just larger than Japan but smaller than Paraguay, with a total area of 390,757 km², of which 3,910 km² comprises lakes and reservoirs.

==Climate==

The climate is tropical, although markedly moderated by altitude. There is a dry season, including a short cool season during the period May to September when the whole country has very little rain. The rainy season is typically a time of heavy rainfall from November to March. The whole country is influenced by the Intertropical Convergence Zone during January. In years when it is poorly defined there is below average rainfall and a likelihood of serious drought in the country (as happened in 1983 and 1992). When it is well-defined rainfall is average or well above average, as in 1981 and 1985.

==Terrain==

Much of the country is high plateau with higher central plateau (high veld) forming a watershed between the Zambezi and Limpopo river systems. The Limpopo and the lower Zambezi valleys are broad and relatively flat plains. The eastern end of the watershed terminates in a north-south mountain spine, called the Eastern Highlands. 
Elevation extremes:
 lowest point: junction of the Runde and Save rivers 162 m 
 highest point: Mount Nyangani 2,592 m 
Natural resources: coal, chromium ore, asbestos, gold, nickel, copper, iron ore, vanadium, lithium, tin, platinum group metals
Land use:
 arable land: 10.49%
 permanent crops: 0.31%
 other: 89.20% (2011) 
Irrigated land: 1,735 km² (2003) 
Total renewable water resources: 20 km3 (2011)
Natural hazards: droughts; floods and severe storms are rare 
Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; land degradation; air and water pollution; the black rhinoceros herd - once the largest concentration of the species in the world - has been significantly reduced by poaching; poor mining practices have led to toxic waste and heavy metal pollution
Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements 
Hydrology:
The country is divided into six drainage basins. The largest are the Zambezi and the Limpopo. Western parts of Matabeleland connect to the Okavango inland drainage basin through the Nata river. Most of the southern Mashonaland and adjacent parts of Masvingo drain through the Save river into the Indian ocean. Two smaller drainage basins cover parts of Manicaland, and drain into the Indian Ocean through Mozambique. These are the Pungwe river to the north and the Buzi river to the south. Sediment transport has been studied for rivers in Zimbabwe using the HBV hydrology transport model.
Table 1.
Rainfall and land use suitability options in Zimbabwe's natural regions
Natural region
Rainfall
Main land use type:

==Extreme points==

This is a list of the extreme points of Zimbabwe, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


