[[John Rennie High School]]

CATEGORIES: English-language schools in Quebec, High schools in Montreal, Educational institutions established in 1955, Education in Pointe-Claire, Lester B. Pearson School Board, Buildings and structures in Pointe-Claire, 1955 establishments in Canada

John Rennie High School (JRHS), located in Pointe-Claire, Quebec, Canada, is an English language secondary school which opened in 1955. The school was named after John Rennie (1904–1952), the Union Nationale Member of the Legislative Assembly of Quebec for Huntingdon from 1947 to 1952.
Pointe-Claire was and remains in a riding that has voted for the Quebec Liberal Party; thus, when local representatives made their case to Premier Maurice Duplessis for the building of a new high school to meet the needs of the burgeoning post-World War II school population, Premier Duplessis' stipulation for the funding was for the building to be named after his recently deceased fellow Union Nationale MNA and longtime party fundraiser. However, this was not completely a partisan political decision of Premier Duplessis, as John Rennie had been the Assistant Director of Protestant Schools in Pointe-Claire from 1930 to 1936, as well as Principal of the Valois Park and Cedar Park Schools.
John Rennie is administered by the Lester B. Pearson School Board.
In 1969, John Rennie was expanded which added 2 new gymnasiums, a caffeteria, a library, several new hallways as well as a state of the art audiotorium. This expansion over doubled the school's enrollement.

==Extracurricular and Programs==

John Rennie High School has taken part in the Canadian Improv Games for the past ten years, winning the Montreal games for eight of those years. Originally, every year it supported just one team, but as of 2004-2005, it started supporting a second team, sending both teams to compete in the CIG. John Rennie is proud to be the 2011 Canadian Improv Games' National champions. "We Need a Ride Home" has brought great pride to John Rennie by being the first Montreal team in over 10 years to bring home the gold!
The Sport-Études program was launched at John Rennie High School in the 2000-2001 school year. The Sport Federations involved have concluded protocols with the Lester B. Pearson School Board and John Rennie High School, local clubs/associations; and   Ministry of Education, Leisure and Sports (MELS). Entrance criteria and practice requirements are set by the individual Federations. For the 2010-2011 school year, John Rennie's Sport-Études program offers boxing, diving, figure skating, gymnastics, hockey, ringuette, soccer, basketball, swimming, synchronized swimming, tennis, track & field and water polo.
Actors' studio, formerly run by Louise Chalmers before her retirement in 2010, has been very successful in 
producing many theatrical productions, including those written by Shakespeare, each with its own modern twist. 
Other programs include Academic Plus & Renniessance.
As a member of Peaceful Schools International which declares a commitment to creating and maintaining a culture of peace within the school, John Rennie High School was the first school in Quebec to accommodate the award-winning experiential programme Challenge Day (2008). The Challenge Day mission is to provide youth and their communities with an opportunity to demonstrate the possibility of love and connection through the celebration of diversity, truth, and full expression. John Rennie brought Challenge Day back in 2011 for three days. The Respect Committee of the school will work to endorse the principles of peace and connection among the John Rennie High School community.

==Notable alumni==

==References==

==External links==


