[[Belize national cricket team]]

CATEGORIES: Cricket in Belize, National cricket teams, National sports teams of Belize, Belize in international cricket

The Belizean national cricket team represents the country of Belize in international cricket matches. Belize has been an affiliate member of the ICC since 1997Belize at CricketArchive.com but did not make their international cricket debut until 2004, playing in the qualifying tournament for the ICC Americas Championship.  They currently play in the ICC Americas Championship Division Three.

==History==

Belize became an affiliate member of the ICC in 1997. Their first international match was played on 23 March 2004 in the 2004 Americas Affiliate Tournament against Suriname who they beat.News Flash Americas Mar 2004
In 2006, they hosted the first ever Central American Cricket Championship, where they won the tournament that also featured Costa Rica and Mexico.Belize claim first Central American cricket title at CricketArchive.com Later in the year, they played in the second division of the ICC Americas Championship, finishing fifth of five teams.ICC World Cricket League Americas Region Division Two 2006 Table at CricketArchive.com As a result they were relegated to 2008 Division Three.
Belize were intended to play in the 2007 Central American Cricket Championship, but pulled out at the last minute giving El Salvador the chance to participate.News Flash Americas Nov 2007
In the 2008 Division Three tournament, although they were favorites to win, Belize finished third of five teams. Later that year, they took part in the 2nd Easter Cup held in El Salvador. Belize beat Costa Rica and Mexico to finish in first place in the Twenty20 competition.News Flash Americas Dec 2008
Belize took part in the 2009 Central American Championship, finishing third of five teams. They were beaten by close rivals Mexico in the new Twenty20 format of the competition.

==Tournament history==

ICC Americas Championship
Central American Championship
Easter Cup

==Future==

Belize will take part in the next ICC Americas Championship Division Three. This is likely to take place in 2010.

==References==


