[[Charles Emrys Smith]]

CATEGORIES: Welsh economists, British academics, Living people

Dr. Charles Smith Brocca is Head of Curriculum and Quality in Swansea School of Education at Swansea Metropolitan University (University of Wales). Author/co-author of Economic Development (Palgrave), International Trade and Globalisation (Anforme),Reviewed in the Summer 2007 edition of Teaching Economics and Business (journal of the Economics and Business Education Association) Revision Express Economics (Pearson-Longman)Reviewed in the Spring 2007 edition of Teaching Economics and Business (journal of the Economics and Business Education Association)  and many academic and journalistic articles in the fields of economics and business education, devolution, regional development and European integration. His research specializes in comparative politics and economics of Wales and Catalonia, education, training and employment.Recent publications include: 'What Effect is China Having on International Trade?' Economics Today, January 2006; 'The UK Balance of Payments', in P. Maunder (ed.), Developments in Economics: an Annual Review, Causeway/ Pearson, 2005. He has also contributed to the Encyclopedia of Business in Today's World.Sage Publications, USA, 2009 He often broadcasts on regional television and radio in an 'expert' role on economic and political matters.
Smith has national standing as an examiner and curriculum developer.See, for example 'Problem Solver' column: 'Testing Times for a New Examiner,'   Make the Grade (Institute of Educational Assessors) November 2005. He is a former chief examiner with the International Baccalaureate Organisation and has undertaken teacher training in countries spanning the five continents. He has also been a consultant for the UK government's Qualifications and Curriculum Development Agency (QCDA), an adviser to the Welsh Assembly Government (member of the Wales Employment Advisory Panel) and a member of the economic council of Britain in Europe.

==Notes and references==

==Books==

==External links==


