[[Chestnut-capped Brush Finch]]

CATEGORIES: Emberizidae, Birds of El Salvador

The  Chestnut-capped Brush Finch (Arremon brunneinucha), is a  passerine bird  which breeds in highlands from central Mexico to southeastern Peru. Despite its name, it is not a true  finch, but rather a member of the large Emberizidae family, which also includes buntings,  American sparrows,  juncos and towhees. Until recently, it was generally placed in the genus Buarremon,Cadena, C. D., J. Klicka and R. E. Ricklefs. (2007). Evolutionary differentiation in the Neotropical montane region: molecular phylogenetics and phylogeography of Buarremon brush-finches (Aves, Emberizidae). Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 44(3): 993-1016. while it occasionally has been placed in Atlapetes.
This is a common bird in the undergrowth of wet mountain forests, second growth, and ravines from  900 m to 2500 m altitude.
The nest, built by the female, is a large cup of plant material placed less than 2.5 m up in a shrub or small tree in dense scrub or a ravine. The typical clutch is two glossy, unmarked white or pale blue eggs, which are incubated by the female alone for 12–14 days to hatching. 
The Chestnut-capped Brush Finch is a large, robust, mainly terrestrial species, 19 cm long and weighing 45 g. It has a long slender bill  and large feet and legs. The adult has a distinctive head pattern, with a yellow-edged chestnut crown and nape, black forehead and head sides, white spots in the centre and each side of the forehead, and a white throat which is often puffed up  when the bird is excited. The upperparts are dark olive, with darker wings . The white central breast is separated from the white throat by a black band. The breast sides are grey, and the flanks and lower belly are olive-green.   Young birds have a sooty-brown cap, sooty face and olive-brown upperparts, throat and breast.
The Chestnut-capped Brush Finch has a thiny pink call and a very high-pitched psssst. The male’s song consists of  a mixture of whistles and sharper notes.
The Chestnut-capped Brush Finch feeds on insects and spiders  extracted from the leaf litter with its bill, and also pick  berries and invertebrate prey from low bushes.  It is seen in pairs, family parties, or with warblers and other Emberizids as part of a mixed-species feeding flock. 

==References==


