[[Joseph Perry (bishop)]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 births, American Roman Catholic bishops, Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Chicago, People from Chicago, Illinois, People from Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Living people, Sacred Heart School of Theology alumni, Saint Joseph's College (Indiana) alumni, St. Francis Seminary (Wisconsin) alumni, Marquette University faculty, University of St. Mary of the Lake faculty, African-American religious leaders, African-American Catholics, American Roman Catholics, African-American Roman Catholic priests, Roman Catholic titular bishops

Joseph Nathaniel Perry (born April 18, 1948) is a Roman Catholic auxiliary bishop in the Archdiocese of Chicago.

==Education==

A native of Chicago, Illinois, Joseph Perry attended various Catholic elementary schools in Chicago between 1954 and 1962. For one year, in 1962, he attended Carver High School, moving on to St. Lawrence Seminary High School for the remainder of his high school years. Perry undertook undergraduate studies at Saint Joseph's College in Rensselaer, Indiana, graduating in 1971 with two B.A. degrees in Philosophy and Theology, as well as a minor in Education.
Perry obtained a Master of Divinity from St. Francis Seminary in 1975. He also attended the Capuchin Seminary of St. Mary and St. Joseph College. He was ordained a priest in the Archdiocese of Milwaukee on May 24, 1975.

==Diocesan service==

From the mid-1970s to the late 1990s, Bishop Perry was a priest within the Archdiocese of Milwaukee, serving as associate pastor of St. Nicholas Parish. During this time, he worked within the tribunal of the Archdiocese of Milwaukee, becoming Chief Judicial Officer of the Tribunal from 1983 until 1995. Bishop Perry became pastor of All Saints Church in Milwaukee in 1995 until his ordination as a bishop.
Perry had been a professor of canon law at the Sacred Heart School of Theology in Hales Corners, Wisconsin. Since 1996 he has been an instructor in canon law at both the Marquette University Law School and since 1997 at Mundelein Seminary. Perry was given the titular diocese of Lead on May 5, 1998. Since having been consecrated a bishop on June 29, 1998, Bishop Perry has been the episcopal vicar for Vicariate VI of the Archdiocese of Chicago.

==Membership and Appointments==

In 2011, Bishop Perry was named by Cardinal Francis George to be the Diocesan Postulator for the Cause Fr. Augustus Tolton's canonization.
Since 2004, Perry has been the Chairman of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops Committee on African American Catholics, and also sits on several other USCCB committees, including those for Education, the Ad Hoc Committee on Catholics' Use of Holy Scripture, the Secretariat for Family, Laity, Women and Youth, and the Ad Hoc Committee for a Plenary Council.
Perry is vice-president of the National Black Catholic Congress's board.  He is the national chaplain for the Knights of St. Peter Claver and Ladies Auxiliary in New Orleans where the Knights have their headquarters. Since 1977 he has been a member of the Canon Law Society of America. In 1998 he sat on the Board of Advisors of Archbishop Quigley Preparatory Seminary. In addition, he has been an episcopal liaison for Catechetics and Liturgical Training Publications, and is a judge sitting on the Court of Appeals.

==External links==


