[[Makhach Murtazaliev]]

CATEGORIES: Russian sport wrestlers, Olympic wrestlers of Russia, Wrestlers at the 2004 Summer Olympics, Olympic bronze medalists for Russia, 1984 births, Living people, Olympic medalists in wrestling

Makhach Dalgatovich Murtazaliev ([tpl]lang-ru|Махач Далгатович Муртазалиев[/tpl]; born 4 June 1984 in Khasavyurt, Dagestan, Russia) is a Russian Olympic wrestler who won the bronze medal for Russia at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens.Olympic results
In 2006, he went up to the next weight category and was the 2007 World and European champion at 74 kg.

==References==

Machatsch Murtasalijew was born in the Caucasus city of Khasavyurt in the Republic of Dagestan. He began in 1996 with the rings and is trained for a long period of Abdurachman Mirzajew. He focuses fully on the free style. Machatsch Murtasalijew, while a member of the Army sports club CSKA Moscow, but is no longer in the Russian army, but is enrolled at the University of Dagestan in Makhachkala as a law student.
The sporting successes of Machatsch Murtazaliew presented itself a junior in age. So he was in 2000 in Bratislava European Junior Champion (Cadets) in free style in the weight to 42 kg body weight. In 2001 he was in Izmir Junior European champion with the Cadets. He was promoted to the weight to 54 kg body weight. Finally, he succeeded in 2003 in Istanbul and Junior World Champion (juniors) in the featherweight (60 kg body weight) to be.
As a 20-year-old athlete, he was set up in 2004 in Ankara for the first time at the European Championships of the elderly. He managed it in the semifinals of the strong Turkish Ömer Çubukçi and the Ossetians in the final Elbrus Tedejew who competed for the Ukraine to conquer, and the first time around become European champions. He then sat down by the Russian in excretion for the Olympic Games in Athens against his main rival Irbek Farnijew and represented Russia in Athens in lightweight. In Athens, however, he lost in the semifinals against the Americans Jamill Kelly. He won but the battle for the bronze medal against Leonid Spiridonov of Kazakhstan. Olympic champion Elbrus Tedejew was no longer on the Makhatch Murtazaliev for his defeat by Kelly met.
In 2005, Irbek Farnijew Russian champion in the lightweight and therefore used in the European Championship. But he disappointed there and took only the 9th Place. Why was the World Cup this year in Budapest Makhatch Murtazaliev the launch site, and justified this confidence of the Russian team's management fully, for he was with five wins in superior style champion. In the final he beat it multiple Bulgarian world champion Serafim Barzakow 2-0 on points.
At the European Championships in Moscow in 2006 was Makhatch Murtazaliev continued his winning streak, as he was with victories in the decisive battles of Ruslan Jeklijew, Ukraine, Serafim Barzakow and Albert Batirow from Belarus after 2004 for the second time European champions. But he disappointed at the World Championships 2006 in Guangzhou, China, for he got there in the quarter-final against Andriy Stadnik of Ukraine and took only a disappointing ninth for him Place.
The Russian president Mikhail Mamiaschwili Ringer was nevertheless still on the young Makhatch Murtazaliev. This proved his strength and then at the European Championships 2007 in Sofia, because he was there in the welterweight division with a 5-0 points victory in the finals of Armenia Ruslan Kokajew again European Champion. And even with the 2007 World Championships in Baku, he won the title. In the semifinals, he defeated Joe Heskett here in the U.S. and in the final Ibragim Aldatow from Ukraine.
In January 2008 there was the "Ivan Jarigin 'Memorial in Krasnoyarsk to meet with Buvaisar Saitiev, the legendary two-time Russian Olympic champion and multiple world champion who is seeking a start in the Olympic Games in Beijing. The younger  Murtazaliev sat down beside it with two smooth round win (1:0 and 3:1) and was by tournament winner. He was then also at the European Championships in Tampere used welterweight and won the European title again there. In the final Makhatch murtazaliev defeated Murad Hajdarau from Belarus on points. When russchischen Cup in June 2008 came in the final again on collision of  with Buvaisar Saitiev that Saitijew narrowly won on points. Saitijew was then given the starting place at the Olympic Games in Beijing.


