[[Bank of Missouri]]

CATEGORIES: Banks based in Missouri, Banks established in 1891

The Bank of Missouri began as The Bank of Perryville which received a state charter on November 2, 1891.
From 1891 until 1902, The Bank of Perryville served as the only bank in Perry County, Missouri.
In June 1997, The Bank of Perryville changed its name to The Bank of Missouri, and expanded into Cape Girardeau, Missouri. Another location in Perryville was also built in 1997, and a loan production office opened in Jackson, Missouri in 1998.
The Bank of Missouri currently operates a total of 21 branch locations in Missouri with two banks in Perryville, four in Cape Girardeau, and one each in Scott City, Patton, Jackson, Marble Hill and Columbia, as well as offering full-service brokerage services and Bank of Missouri Investments and Retirement Planning division.*The Bank of Missouri Investments & Retirement Planning Group

==External links==

The Bank of Perryville received a state charter on November 2, 1891. This began more than a century of continued business. From 1891 until 1902, The Bank of Perryville served as the only bank in Perry County, Missouri. As other banks were organized, the officers of The Bank of Perryville wished their competitors well and proceeded independently. Ironically, The Bank of Perryville seemed to experience growth after the organization of each new competitor. In June 1997, The Bank of Perryville changed its name to The Bank of Missouri, and expanded into Cape Girardeau, Missouri. Another location in Perryville was also built in 1997, and a loan production office opened in Jackson, Missouri in 1998. 
The Bank of Missouri currently operates 21 banks throughout Missouri including the areas of Perryville, Cape Girardeau, Jackson, Marble Hill, Patton, Scott City, Columbia, Springfield, Republic, and Ozark. They also operate a full-service brokerage, insurance, investments and retirement planning division.
The Bank of Missouri is an independent community bank and fully intends to remain so. Being the oldest and most firmly established bank in its primary area, the bank has built a reputation of being consistently conservative and sound. Through the years, The Bank of Missouri has enjoyed a higher quality of leadership, staff, and clientele.

