[[Pokey Reddick]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, Billings Bighorns players, Black Canadian ice hockey players, Black Nova Scotians, Brandon Wheat Kings players, Canadian ice hockey goaltenders, Cape Breton Oilers players, Cincinnati Cyclones players, Edmonton Oilers players, Florida Panthers players, Fort Wayne Komets players, Frankfurt Lions players, Grand Rapids Griffins (IHL) players, Ice hockey people from Nova Scotia, Kansas City Blades players, Las Vegas Thunder players, Living people, Moncton Hawks players, Nanaimo Islanders players, New Westminster Bruins players, People from Halifax, Nova Scotia, Phoenix Roadrunners (IHL) players, San Antonio Dragons players, Sherbrooke Canadiens players, Stanley Cup champions, Winnipeg Jets (1979–96) players

Eldon Wade "Pokey" Reddick (born October 6, 1964) is a retired professional ice hockey goaltender in the National Hockey League from 1986–87 to 1993–94.

==Playing career==

Reddick spent most of his career in various minor leagues playing for various teams. His NHL-level experience included playing for the Winnipeg Jets, Edmonton Oilers, and Florida Panthers. He won a Stanley Cup Championship with the Oilers in 1990 as the backup goaltender to Bill Ranford.  During his tenure with the Winnipeg Jets, he formed one half of the goaltending duo "Pokey and the Bandit" with Daniel Berthiaume.
Pokey Reddick holds the National Hockey League record for most games played by a goaltender without recording a shutout. Reddick played in 132 National Hockey League games over his career without recording a single shutout.http://winnipegjets.org/eldon-pokey-reddick
Reddick also holds the distinction of being the only goaltender at any level of professional hockey to go through a three-round playoff system undefeated. He achieved this feat with the Fort Wayne Komets in the IHL in 1992–93. Reddick had a 1.49 GAA through 12 postseason games, leading the Komets to the franchise's first title in 20 years.
He was formerly an assistant coach for the Tri-City Storm of the USHL and is currently Hockey Director for the Las Vegas Storm AAA Hockey Club

==Personal==

Reddick received the nickname "Pokey" from his father as a result of his "slowpoke" movement throughout the house.LegendsOfHockey.net: Eldon "Pokey" Reddick" 
His younger brother, Stan "Smokey" Reddick, was also a goaltender who spent twelve years playing in the ECHL and Slovenia.EliteProspects.com: Eldon Reddick Player Profile Page His son, Bryce Reddick, is a forward currently enrolled in Michigan Tech's hockey program. Pokey also has three other children: Jenna Reddick, Zoe Reddick, and Matthew Vorce. 
He currently resides in Las Vegas, Nevada and served as tournament director at the Las Vegas Ice Center through April 2014 and Head Coach of the Las Vegas Storm Midget U16 AAA hockey team through April 2013.

==Awards and achievements==

==References==

==External links==


