[[Crash B-Daman]]

CATEGORIES: B-Daman, 2005 manga, 2006 manga, Anime series

[tpl]nihongo|Crash B-Daman|爆球Hit! クラッシュビーダマン|Bakkyū Hit! Kurasshi Bīdaman[/tpl] is the third comic adaptation of the B-Daman toy, first serialized in January 2006 issue of Coro Coro Comic. The television series started on January 9, 2006, replacing Battle B-Daman in TV Tokyo. It was the last television series of B-Daman until Cross Fight B-Daman was announced on June 3, 2011.

==Story==

Hitto Tamaga living on his own after his father had gone missing, receives a Crash B-Daman, his first B-Daman, as his birthday present from his missing father. Holding this message from his father in his heart, Hitto makes up his mind to participate in B-Daman battle tournament called 'B-10 Crash Cup.' Through the battles, Hitto encounters a lot of rivals and sometimes develops friendships with them. After the tournament, he comes to know about a secret society of rascal B-ders who find reason for living only in crashing. What is their true purpose? And what secret is there beside Hitto’s B-Daman?

==Characters==

He is the main character. Hiito is the son of Dr. Tamaga, a b-daman scientist, and is also Nana's cousin.  He receives his own b-daman on his birthday. One of the 7 legendary b-ders to save the world from Saionji. He is voiced Kahoru Sasajima.
Former bad guy, Kodoh decides to be with Hitto's side than work for Saionji. He compliments Nana in one of the episodes. When the time comes for searching for the 7 legendary b-ders and foiling Saionji's plans of taking over the world, he always shows up when the main protagonists are going to lose. He is one of the 7 legendary b-ders much to the surprise of the others. he is voiced by Urara Takano.
A b-daman hunter. He has 3 sisters that he is afraid of because they make him do a lot of hard work. He is one of the 7 legendary b-ders. he is voiced by Misato Fukuen.
He has a split personality, one being gentle and kind while the other is rude and evil. This is only revealed later in the series. He is one of the 7 legendary b-ders. He is voiced by Hiroshi Kamiya.
She is Hitto's cousin and Dr. Tamaga's niece. She wanted to become a b-der like Hitto and the others.  She thought she was originally one of the legendary b-ders but was mistaken as her b-daman didn't glow. She is voiced by Akemi Kanda.
He is one of the 7 legendary b-ders. He is voiced by Rikiya Koyama.

==Product List==

==Terms and Names==

The B-Daman is the main item in the game. It is a figure designed to fire spherical marbles, called B-Dama
The official marbles for B-Daman are .67 of an inch; most marbles in the world are .5 of an inch. Biidama is the Japanese word for "marble."
A change on the official marble for B-Daman. They are .67 of an inch, but have different properties. Like being clear, plastic, metal, or being able to split.
The official marble for .98 Caliber Crash Weapons. They are .98 of an inch, and have holes in them like a wiffleball. Some have Strike Shots inside them.
The item used in battle, has six pillars that can fill up with two marbles each. Has three guard rails on top, connected to a Guard Pillar, that if falls so do the guards.
The item that can go on the side of the B-Daman, adding a different type of fire to the B-Daman.
Where the battles take place, they are approx. 4'x1'
Keeps marbles from falling out of the B-Daman, creates force.
Prong on a Hold Part, Crash B-Daman have 2-9 Claws.
a coin shaped circle loaded into a "Rush Thrower" (Unknown Name); used in Super Rush Battle
item that throws Battle Coins in Super Rush system
super crash game.

==Rules of Crash Battle==

==How to Play==

The point of this game is to take down the marbles on top of the opponent's Crash Tower before he/she does the same to you. You can topple with your B-Daman/Crash Weapons, following the above rules.
The point of this game is to shoot as many Battle Coins as you can on your opponents side. You load ??? number of Battle Coins into the "Rush Thrower" (Unknown Name), and it fires them out one by one. Each player tries to fire at the Battle Coin and knock it on the opponents side.
See B-Daman
See B-Daman
Same rules as Crash Battle, using Crash Blocks in front of each Crash Tower to block B-Dama

==Types of B-Daman==

There are four types of Crash B-Daman;

==3 Block Gear System==

3 Block Gear System is the name for the first series of Crash B-Daman. They used three "blocks", Block 1: Barrel, Block 2: Core, and Block 3: Grip. There is a slot for a server built into every grip. Along with that, there are two slots on the arms of the Core for a Crash Weapon.

==Synchro Weapon System==

Synchro Weapon System is the name for the second series of Crash B-Daman. It enhances on the 3 Block Gear System. The Grip Block is now further advanced with a second trigger, called the Synchro Trigger. It activates Synchro Weapons Attached, allowing for a shot without using your non-firing hand. The gimmicks are more complex, like a Triple Roller Hold, or an Astral Drive Hold.

==Parts List and Parts Overview==

Barrels
Barrels give you accuracy, or can increase power
A Short Barrel.
Available on Magnum Ifrit
A Medium Barrel.
Available on Blitz Garuda
A Long Barrel.
Available on Bal Tauros
A Short Barrel, shorter than .67 Short Circuit.
Available on Strum Griffon
A Powerful and Long Barrel. The weight of this barrel is what gives it the power.
Available on Rave Pegasus and Shade Wyvern
A very Short Barrel.
Available on Evil Levioth
A Medium Barrel, allows for a second barrel to be attached to it. It has a handle for increased control. Used on Control/Power/Rush/Balance Customs.
Available on Iron Odin
A Short Barrel equipped with springs on either side. The springs hold onto the hold parts to increase power.
Available on Justice Ifrit
A Short Barrel equipped with rollers on either side. The rollers increase ease of shot.
Available on Mach Garuda
A Long Barrel equipped with a stabilizer on the end. It can be flipped from Roller Mode to Stabilizer Mode.
Available on Assault Tauros
A Long Barrel with no special features.
Available on Shining Pegasus
A Short Barrel with an adaptor for a second barrel.
Available on Reflect Wyvern and Alpha Bahamut (Alpha Bahamut found in Final Battle Box)
A barrel that uses some methode to fire B-Daballs from itself rather than the core.
Can fire three shots at once.
Available on Omega Bahamut
An extra long barrel made from .67 Front and .67 Rear.
Available on Eclipse Dragon
Cores
Cores determine the type of B-Daman it is
Drive Holds, 3 Claws.
Available on Magnum Ifrit
Roller Holds, 2 Claws.
Available on Blitz Garuda
Round Holds, 2 Claws.
Available on Bal Tauros
Balance Holds, 2 Claws
Available on Strum Griffon
Right Spin Drive Holds, 2 Claws. It has a Drive Strip on the right side. Besides that, it is a Balance Hold.
Available on Rave Pegasus
Left Spin Roller Holds, 2 Claws. It has a Roller on the right side. Besides that, it is a Balance Hold.
Available on Shade Wyvern
Power Roller Holds, 2 Claws. It has one roller on each side, but with a Drive Strip in the middle, adding Power.
Available on Evil Levioth
Fore Holds, 2 Claws. It has one Drive Strip on each side.
Roller Holds, see Blitz Garuda.
Available on Iron Odin
Astral Holds, 9 Claws. It has four claws on each side, and one on the bottom with a Drive Strip.
Available on Justice Ifrit
Triple Roller Holds, 3 Claws. It has one claw on each side, and one on the bottom, each with a Roller.
Available on Mach Garuda
Triple Round Holds, 3 Claws. It has two round holds on the side, and an extra claw on the bottom with a grove on it to guide the shot in a straight line.
Available on Assault Tauros
Balance Holds, two claws. See Griffon
Available on Shining Pegasus
Round Holds, two claws. See Tauros
Available on Reflect Wyvern
No holds.
Available on Omega Bahamut
Round Holds, two claws. See Tauros or Wyvern 2
Available on Eclipse Dragon
Round Holds, two claws. See Tauros, Wyvern 2, or Dragon 
Available on Alpha Bahamut (found in Final Battle Box)
Grips
Grips determine the comfort of your shot, and some increase power
Basic grip with a rough grip for ease of hold.
Available on Magnum Ifrit
Basic grip with a smooth grip for smoother shots.
Available on Blitz Garuda
Basic grip with a semi-rough grip for balance hold.
Available on Bal Tauros
Basic grip with lines for a good grip.
Available on Sturm Griffon
Has an extra gear for extra power.
Available on Rave Pegasus and Crash B-Daman Custom Try Set
Has no gears for easier shots.
Available on Shade Wyvern
Basic grip
Available on Evil Levioth
Basic grip with a small grip line on it.
Available on Iron Odin
Same use as Power Grip, has a Synchro Trigger.
Available on Justice Ifrit
Similar to Synchro Grip (Fire), but it has a smooth gripping end and a bigger Synchro Trigger pad for Rush.
Available on Mach Garuda 
Similar to Synchro Grip (Fire), but has a gripping end designed for a firmer hold.
Available on Assault Tauros
A basic Synchro Grip with a gripping end designed to fit the hand.
Available on Shining Pegasus
A basic Synchro Grip with a gripping end designed to fit the hand.
Available on Reflect Wyvern
A Synchro Grip with a large, lined handle to provide a firm grip.
Available on Omega Bahamut and Alpha Bahamut (Alpha Bahamut only found in Final Battle Box)
A Double Synchro Grip (formed by Synchro Grips Sun/Moon and Reflect Wyvern's Connect Server). By using both hands, shots are fired more smoothly.
Available on Eclipse Dragon
A Double Synchro Grip (formed by two Synchro Grips (Dark) and Alpha Bahamut's Connect Server). By using both hands, shots are fired more smoothly.
Available on Ultimate Bahamut (found in Final Battle Box)
Crash Weapons/Synchro Weapons
Crash/Synchro weapons are a secondary form of fire on either side of the B-Daman
Can fire a .98 bullet. Has 4 claws and a drive strip on one. Revolver Style.
Can fire three .67 bullets at a time. Has a drive strip at the front.
Can fire two .67 bullets side-by-side at a time. Has two drive strips.
Fires two .67 bullets at a time, is reloadable through a server.
Fires a newly designed .67 bullet built just for it.
Fires two .67 bullets at a time, it has adjustable spin on each one.
Same use as Reload Launcher, except it only fires one at a time. Attaches to Tactical Shot to form Hybrid Cannon. Synchro option available.
Has a barrel, fires one .67 bullet at a time. Attaches to Beat Launcher to form Hybrid Cannon. Synchro option available.
Fires one .98 bullet at a time, and is reloadable through a server. Synchro option available.
Servers and Barrels
Servers increase the amount of B-Dama you can hold
Holds seven extra shots.
Increases Control and Power.
Holds three extra shots.
Available on Sturm Griffon
Has a mirrored sight to give a great shot. Can hold three extra shots.
Holds three extra shots and gives a better grip.
Available on Evil Levioth
Holds a large amount of extra shots. When out of shots, it will rotate to refill.
Holds two extra shots in Server Mode, and has a second use as a stand in Stabilizer Mode. Also used to attach a second grip when in Stabilizer Mode.
Available on Reflect Wyvern
B-Dama, Strike Shots, and Bombs
B-Dama
Weight: 2, Speed: 2, Power: 2, Attack Distance: 2, Attack Range: 2
Strike Shot
Weight: 1, Speed: 4, Power: 2, Attack Distance: 4, Attack Range: 2
Weight: 2, Speed: 2, Power: 3, Attack Distance: 1, Attack Range:4
Weight: 3, Speed: 1, Power: 3, Attack Distance: 1, Attack Range: 2
Weight: 1, Speed: 5, Power: 1, Attack Distance: 3, Attack Range: 2
Weight: 1, Speed: 5, Power: 1, Attack Distance: 3, Attack Range: 2
Weight: 1, Speed: 4, Power: 2, Attack Distance: 5, Attack Range: 2
Weight: 1.5, Speed: 4.5, Power: 2, Attack Distance: 2, Attack Range: 2
Weight: 2, Speed: 2, Power: 2, Attack Distance: 2, Attack Range: 4
Weight: 1, Speed: 4, Power: 2, Attack Distance: 5, Attack Range: 2
Weight: 1, Speed: 4, Power: 2, Attack Distance: 5, Attack Range: 2
Weight: 1, Speed: 5, Power: 1, Attack Distance: 3, Attack Range: 2
Weight: 1, Speed: 3, Power: 2.5, Attack Distance: 5, Attack Range: 2
Weight: 3, Speed: 2, Power: 2, Attack Distance: 2, Attack Range: 2          
Grenade shot
Weight: 3, Speed: 1, Power: 3, Attack Distance: 2, Attack Range: 4
Weight: 2, Speed: 2, Power: 2, Attack Distance: 3, Attack Range: 4
Weight: 5, Speed: 0, Power: 4, Attack Distance: 2, Attack Range: 4

==Customized Crash B-daman==

A good customization that I will consider is that you combine .67 rear and .67 suspensions for the barrel, then having Garuda 2 as your core, and having Synchro Grip(Fire) as your grip, adding Synchro Server and Hybrid Cannon as your accessories thus making your power-2 rush-3 and control-3

==References==

==External links==



