[[Krueger Library]]

CATEGORIES: University and college academic libraries in the United States, Libraries in Minnesota, Winona, Minnesota, Winona State University, Library buildings completed in 1999, Buildings and structures in Winona County, Minnesota

Darrell W. Krueger Library known as WSU Krueger Library is located on the Winona State University campus in the center of Winona, Minnesota. The library is a resource for the greater southeastern Minnesota and WSU community. It is a United States Federal depository library.
The building was completed in 1999 and was named after former WSU President Darrell W. Krueger in Spring 2005, the year he retired. From 1999 until its naming, it was referred to simply as the "New Library," to distinguish it from Maxwell Hall, formerly the Maxwell Library, which was situated on the opposite side of campus. The library has three floors with over 250,000 book volumes, thousands of periodical titles, and over 100 online databases. It was built with the "Laptop University" in mind; it contains over 1,800 network ports and wireless access, and over ten high speed duplexing laser printers throughout the building.
As for technology, the library offers public terminals for internet access and printing.  It also offers research computers for catalog and WSU database access to anyone in the library building. The Library's Information Gallery (IG), located on the first floor, has 42 high end multimedia computer towers, both Macintosh and PC platforms are supported.  The IG circulates laptops, power and network cords, webcams, media carts which include a wide screen TV and DVD/VCR, and other peripherals, such as webcams (for WSU students only).  It also has six laptop workstations for scanning. On all three floors of the library there are many study rooms in which students study and work on group projects.

==Library Athenaeum==

The Athenaeum hosts events that explore and enhance the intellectual life of the University and the region. These events could include lectures, readings, discussions, seminars, performance arts, and other educational experiences.
By bringing together scholars, performing artists, students, community members, and other interested people for intellectual discussion and the sharing of cultural experiences, the Athenaeum reflects the importance the University places on the humanities, the arts, and the sciences.
Location:  The Athenaeum is located on the south/bluff side of the second floor of the Krueger Library. It seats approximately 60 people. Athenaeum events are typically scheduled on Wednesdays between 1:00pm and 2:00pm.

==External links==


