[[Abdul Hamid Sharaf School]]

CATEGORIES: Schools in Jordan, Education in Amman, AdvancED

Abdul Hamid Sharaf School (or AHSS) is a private school in Amman, Jordan. It was founded by Farid and Sue Dahdah, in 1980. It is named after the former prime minister Abdul Hamid Sharaf, who had recently died at the time. 
The school is located in the Deir Ghbar neighborhood of West Amman not far from the American Embassy, the British Embassy and The French School. The easiest ways to reach the school are to exit from the airport highway or to come from the sixth circle (see location map).
The school building and grounds are located on six and one half dunums (1½ acres). 
Facilities include:
AHSS was reaccredited in spring 2009 by the North Central Association Commission on Accreditation and School Improvement (NCA CASI) a division of AdvancED.Institution Summary, AdvancED, Retrieved 2012-07-08 Among the advantages of accreditation, graduates of the American high school program at AHSS can obtain equalization for their school diploma from the Jordanian Ministry of Education. Equalization is necessary for students who plan to do their college or university studies in Jordan.
AHSS is an associate member of the Near East South Asia Council of Overseas Schools (NESA). Dr. Sue Dahdah has been a member since 1971 while AHSS has been since 1980. School representatives attend the annual administrators' and teachers' conferences organized by NESA throughout the Near Eastern and South Asian regions.
Uniform is worn by grades one through seven, comprising navy blue pants or culottes, white shirts and turquoise or navy blue cardigans and pullovers. Neckties and scarves are worn for formal occasions. For physical education, white school T-shirt, shorts and training suit are worn. Uniform is not required for students in grades eight through twelve although a dress code is in effect.

==Curriculum==

Abdul Hamid Sharaf School teaches two different curricula: 
An American curriculum is taught which prepares students to write the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) and the Scholastic Aptitude Subject Tests (SAT II). This curriculum is aimed at the students who are from the United States and plan to return there for their post-secondary education. Although completion of the SAT stream and passing marks in the SAT and SAT II tests is recognized by Jordanian universities as proof of secondary education it is not looked favorably upon. 
The International General Certificate of Secondary Education (IGCSE) curriculum is also taught. This prepares students for the O level and A level exams which are internationally recognized as proof of secondary education. Passing marks in the O and A level exams are recognized as completion of secondary education by most Jordanian Universities. This stream is often chosen by students who plan to continue into post-secondary education outside of Jordan or in a Jordanian university which teaches in English.

==External links==

==References==


