[[American International School of Budapest]]

CATEGORIES: American international schools, Schools in Hungary, Educational institutions established in 1973, International Baccalaureate schools in Hungary, 1973 establishments in Hungary

The American International School of Budapest (or AISB) is an international school located in Budapest, Hungary. It was established in 1973 by the United States Embassy to serve United States Government employees' dependents, however, it now has a much more diverse student body including children of the local and expatriate business and diplomatic communities. English is the primary medium of instruction. The school's website reports that it serves a population of about 850 students from 57 countries.
AISB previously occupied two purpose-built campuses; however, has since moved to one main campus located in Nagykovácsi. Pre-Kindergarten - Grade 2 (lower elementary) were housed at the Buda Campus (on Kakukk út) in the Buda Hills.  Grades 3 - 12 (upper elementary, middle and high school) shared the Nagykovácsi Campus located just 13 kilometers from the center of Budapest. Currently,  the Nagykovácsi campus holds two buildings (PK-Grade 5, Grade 6-12) on an expanded site.
The school operates four divisions on one campus. The Primary-school building (PK-grade 5) has its own library, multi-purpose room and gym. The other building houses grades 6-12 in afacility built in 2000, complete with 54 classrooms, library, cafeteria, computer rooms, double-sized gymnasium, 25-meter indoor swimming pool, 350-seat theatre, performing and visual arts facilities, and playfield (these facilities are also shared with the Lower school).
A bridge connects the two buildings.

==Sport/activity facilities==

In the summer/fall there will be soccer/football and tennis. After training (5 weeks, 2-3 times a week) there is a sports event with the other international schools in East and Central Europe, under the CEESA (Central and Eastern European Schools Association) organisation.
In winter there is basketball and swimming. In spring there is volleyball and softball. 

==External links==


