[[Blue Mountain Project]]

CATEGORIES: 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizations

The Blue Mountain Project (BMP) is a nonprofit 501(c)3 organization incorporated in the United States and registered in Jamaica. They provide sustainable economic development through education and empowerment. A partnership has been established between the BMP and the community of Hagley Gap and most of the work is done through volunteers. Volunteers come to the Blue Mountain Project from the community and from outside Jamaica.
BMP's current priority is to bring potable water to the people of the Hagley Gap area. Other projects include operating two health clinics (one in Hagley Gap and one in Penlyne Castle), an annual Summer Fun Camp and Back2School Extravaganza to help prepare students for the coming school year, literacy programs to enable more people gain better employment, and working with women's groups, a farmer's cooperative and other groups to find them means to improve their economic base.
  The people of Hagley Gap are rebounding from the winds and flooding of Hurricane Sandy with great self-reliance and neighborly helpfulness. Even though the electricity is still out, the families of the flooded houses along with their neighbors have managed to dry out their homes and are living in them. Herculean efforts with hoes and spades cleared most of the roads. Schools are back in session and the stores have restocked their food supplies.
One great problem remains – the road to the Hagley Gap Clinic was ripped away by Negro River flood waters for about 100 feet. The accompanying photo shows what is left of this road. The pictured house used to have a fence. It was fronted by a rocky road and massive boulders. All this is gone, washed away by the flooded river.
This road is vital for access for the families in Big Yard, the soccer field, the Community Center and the BMP clinic.
BMP will work with the people of the Gap to rebuild this road using your generous Hurricane Sandy donations. Please keep donating so that we can fully rebuild the road.
Blue Mountain Project is a grassroots nonprofit, nongovernmental organization that has been helping rural Jamaican communities since 2004. By living and working directly with the communities we serve, we are able to identify key areas of needed development and facilitate sustainable solutions. Our priority program areas were determined in consultation with the community and by our belief in a holistic approach. BMP's priority program areas are the provision of clean water and quality health care, improving literacy, and economic development. Working with volunteers and community members, we make the most of every donation to effect lasting, productive change.
Incorporated in the United States and registered in Jamaica, BMP is governed by an international Board of Directors that is guided by the needs, ideas, and wishes of the Hagley Gap community. BMP is staffed by a small team of international employees and full-time volunteers. Our strategic plan guides our work and is aligned with the United Nations Millennium Development Goals.
http://www.bluemountainproject.org/

==External links==


