[[Richard Maybery]]

CATEGORIES: 1895 births, 1917 deaths, Welsh aviators, 21st Lancers officers, Royal Flying Corps officers, British World War I flying aces, Aviators killed by being shot down, British Army personnel of World War I, British military personnel killed in World War I, Recipients of the Military Cross and Bar, People educated at Wellington College, Berkshire, Graduates of the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, People from Brecon

Captain Richard Aveline Maybery MC and Bar (1895–19 December 1917) was a Welsh flying ace of the First World War.
Maybery was born in Brecon, Wales, in January 1895, the only son of Aveline Maybery, a solicitor, and his wife Lucy. He was educated locally and at Wellington College, Berkshire, before going on to the Royal Military College at Sandhurst.
After his graduation he joined the 21st (Empress of India's) Lancers. At the outbreak of war he served in the North West Frontier province until he was injured in a riding accident. Bored during his rehabilitation and unable to sit on a horse he became involved in observing for a unit of the Royal Flying Corps who were based nearby.
Later he travelled to Egypt where he trained to be a pilot, before he was posted to France with 56 Squadron, serving with aces James McCudden, Arthur Rhys Davids and Keith Muspratt.
Aggressive and headstrong, Maybery quickly accumulated a high victory tally, and he scored his 21st and final victory, on 19 December 1917, when he shot down an Albatros DV over Bourlon Wood. Maybery's SE5a was then either hit by anti aircraft fire or shot down by Vzfw. Artur Weber of Jasta 5 and crashed near the village of Haynecourt.'Above the Trenches'; Shores (1990) page 264
Maybery was buried at Flesquieres Hill British Cemetery, Nord, France.
His wartime tally consisted of 14 and 2 shared destroyed, and 5 'out of control'.
A marble plaque dedicated to the memory of Richard Aveline Maybery, can be found in Brecon Cathedral. The plaque includes the prayer:

==Quotes==

Reminiscence of Captain Duncan Grinnell-Milne, Commanding Officer of No.56 Squadron RFC, upon hearing news of the death of Captain Richard Maybery

==References==

==External links==


