</ref> Teal is persuaded out of retirement in ''Le Saint contre les Cagoules Grises'' (one of the many French-language Saint novels published in the late 1950s-1960s and based upon one of the American [[comic strip]]s) to help the Saint battle the Grey Hoods. Teal later returned in the 1975 collection ''[[Catch the Saint]]'', which featured two novellas set prior to the Second World War.<ref>
</ref> 
Teal was considered a major character by Charteris, so much so that he named a 1934 volume The Misfortunes of Mr. Teal. (Later editions of 1933's Once More the Saint were also retitled The Saint and Mr. Teal.)

==Film and TV portrayals==

Claud Eustace Teal has appeared in numerous film and TV adaptations of The Saint. Generally (though not always) dramatic depictions of Teal have presented him as a rather less competent policeman than in the novels, with his ponderous approach exaggerated at the expense of his detection abilities. In his most significant adaptation (the 1960s British television series) he is presented as almost incompetent, with his success in solving cases always down to the efforts of Simon Templar.  
When The Saint was first adapted for cinema by RKO Radio Pictures, five of the eight films in the RKO series were set in the United States. As a result, the character of Teal was usually replaced by Inspector Farnack, a New York detective of similar disposition who had been introduced in the novel The Saint in New York. Teal made his first RKO appearance in 1939's The Saint in London played by Gordon McLeod, and McLeod reprised the role in The Saint's Vacation (1941) and The Saint Meets the Tiger (1943). The Saint Meets the Tiger was based upon the aforementioned Meet - The Tiger!, only this time Teal replaces the character of Detective Carn. 
In 1953 British Hammer Film Productions made The Saint's Return, which wasn't based on any of Charteris' stories. This film featured Charles Victor as Teal.
On television, Ivor Dean played Teal as a recurring character in the 1962-69 British series, The Saint. Teal appeared in two early episodes played by other actors (Campbell Singer and Wensley Pithey respectively). Dean appeared in another role in Teal's second appearance (an episode entitled Starring the Saint) before being cast on a permanent basis. In the TV series Templar always greets Teal with mock respect: "Claud Eustace Teal, pride of Scotland Yard". Whilst Teal always gruffly refers to Templar by his surname only, Templar addresses Teal with the much more chummy "my dear Claud". 
The character did not appear in the spin-off, 1978's Return of the Saint, but did make a reappearance in the first episode of the 1989 series of TV movies starring Simon Dutton. On this occasion, he was played by David Ryall. The most recent appearance of the character has been in the 1997 film version of The Saint, played by Alun Armstrong. Besides Templar, Teal is the only character from the original canon to appear in this loosely-based film.

==References==

 

