[[Ned Herrmann]]

CATEGORIES: 1922 births, 1999 deaths, American writers, Business theorists, Creativity researchers, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute alumni

William Edward "Ned" Herrmann (1922 - December 24, 1999) was an American creativity researcher and author, known for his research in creative thinking Ned Herrmann (1922-1999): Pioneer of creative thinking in the corporation and founder of Whole Brain Technology. at hbdi.com, 2005; at archive.org, 2013. and whole-brain methods. He is considered the "father of brain dominance technology."Lumsdaine, Edward, and Monika Lumsdaine. "Creative problem solving." Potentials, IEEE 13.5 (1994): 4-9.Rick Crandall (1999) Celebrate Customer Service. p. 157

==Biography==

At Cornell University, Herrmann majored in both physics and music in the Class of 1943. He continued to study at the Graduate Studies R.P.I., New York University.
After graduation Hermann became manager of Management Education for General Electric (GE) in 1970. His primary responsibility was to oversee training program design; specifically, maintaining or increasing an individual's productivity, motivation, and creativity.
In 1978, Herrmann created the "Herrmann Participant Survey Form" to profile workshop participant's thinking styles and learning preferences in accordance with brain dominance theory. He developed the Herrmann Brain Dominance Instrument (HBDI), the scored and analyzed Participant Survey, and designed the Applied Creative Thinking Workshop (ACT), which remains a leading personality assessment instrument and workshop topic in corporate training. 
Herrmann's contributions brought him worldwide recognition. In 1992, he received the Distinguished Contribution to Human Resource Development Award from the American Society for Training & Development (ASTD). In 1993, he was elected President of The American Creativity Association.

==Work==

Herrmann was a pioneer in exploring, explicating and expanding understanding of the brain in close-up view as a four quadrant system. He was one of the first to ascertain, thru testing, how individuals use or prefer one, two, three or all four possible brain quadrants.  
He spent 30 years from approximately 1964-1996, exploring and explicating Herrmann Brain Dominance Instrument to teaching, learning, increased self-understanding and enhanced creative thinking capabilities, on both an individual and corporate level. 

==Selected publications==

Books:
Articles, a selection:

==References==

==External links==


