[[The Secret of Santa Vittoria]]

CATEGORIES: 1969 films, American films, Best Musical or Comedy Picture Golden Globe winners, 1960s comedy films, English-language films, Films based on novels, Films directed by Stanley Kramer, United Artists films, Italian Campaign of World War II films

The Secret of Santa Vittoria is a 1969 film (produced by Metro Goldwyn Mayer), and distributed by United Artists. It was produced and directed by Stanley Kramer and co-produced by George Glass from a screenplay by Ben Maddow and William Rose. It was based on the best-selling novel by Robert Crichton. The music score was by Ernest Gold and the cinematography by Giuseppe Rotunno.
The film stars Anthony Quinn, Anna Magnani, Virna Lisi, Hardy Krüger, and Sergio Franchi. It also features  Renato Rascel, Giancarlo Giannini, and Eduardo Ciannelli; with Valentina Cortese making an uncredited appearance. It was almost entirely shot on location in Anticoli Corrado, Italy (near Rome).
The world premiere was held in Los Angeles on October 20, 1969. Television coverage included a special split-screen selection during The Joey Bishop Show.  Army Archerd, Regis Philbin and Buddy Hackett interviewed Stanley Kramer, Anthony Quinn, Virna Lisi, and Sergio Franchi from Los Angeles."TV Listings." (October 20, 1969). The Seattle Times, Seattle, WA The premiere was held to benefit the Reiss-Davis Child Study Center, with Gregory Peck as chairman. The event ended with a celebration at the Century Plaza Hotel."Secret Premier to Benefit Study Center." (September 13, 1969) Los Angeles Times, Los Angeles, CA.
This was selected as the opening-night film for the 13th Annual San Francisco International Film Festival. The festival ran from October 23, 1969 through November 2, 1969."Secret Picked for Festival." (August 2, 1969). The Dallas Morning News, Dallas, TX

==Plot==

This story is set during World War II in the summer of 1943, in the aftermath of the fall of the Fascist government of Benito Mussolini. The German army uses the ensuing political vacuum to occupy most of the peninsula of Italy.
Italo Bombolini (Anthony Quinn), the mayor of the wine-making hill town of Santa Vittoria, learns that the German occupation forces want to take all of Santa Vittoria's wine with them. The townspeople frantically hide a million bottles in a cave before the arrival of a German army detachment under the command of Sepp Von Prum (Hardy Krüger). 
The Germans are given a few thousand bottles, but Von Prum knows there is a lot more. The two very different men engage in a battle of wits. Finally, with time running out, a frustrated Von Prum threatens to shoot Bombolini unless the hidden wine is given, but no one speaks up. Not being a fanatic, Von Prum leaves without harming the mayor.

==Cast==

==Reception==

The film earned $6.5 million world wide, which was considered a disappointment considering the popularity of the novel.

==Awards and nominations==

The film was nominated for two Academy Awards for Film Editing (William A. Lyon and Earle Herdan) and Best Music Score (Ernest Gold). It was nominated for an Eddie award by the American Cinema Editors, USA for best edited feature film.http://www.imdb.com
The film won the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture Comedy; and was nominated  by the Golden Globe Awards committee for Best Director (Stanley Kramer), Best Actor Comedy (Anthony Quinn), Best Actress Comedy (Anna Magnani), Best Original Score (Ernest Gold) and Best Original Song ("Stay", Ernest Gold and Norman Gimbel)

==Curiosity==

In Italy, the real Santa Vittoria winery still produces the Santa Vittoria wines. The winery, much older than the film, was founded 300 years ago in the same place as the Battle of Scannagallo (1554) in Foiano della Chiana, Arezzo.

==References==

==External links==


