[[Floris of London]]

CATEGORIES: 1730 establishments in England, Companies established in 1730, Luxury brands, Shops in London, Buildings and structures in the City of Westminster, Companies based in London, English brands, Retail companies of England

thumb|Floris of London|right Floris is the oldest English retailer of toiletries and accessories and second oldest in the world after Farina gegenüber of Cologne, Germany.
Floris was founded in 1730 by Juan Famenias Floris, who arrived in England from his native island of Menorca to seek fortune. Shortly after his arrival, in 1730, he secured premises in Jermyn Street, in the elegant quarter of London's St.James. Juan Famenias Floris initially set up business as a barber and comb-maker, however, he soon missed the aromas and sensations of his Mediterranean youth.
The first Royal Warrant was granted to J.Floris Ltd was in 1820 as 'Smooth Pointed Comb-makers' to the then newly appointed King George IV. Today this first Royal warrant is still on display at 89 Jermyn Street together with no less than sixteen others. Floris holds two today: Perfumers to HM The Queen Elizabeth II and Manufacturers of Toilet Preparations to HRH The Prince of Wales.
The Floris archives hold letters from famous customers detailing their preferences and their thanks, examples include:
In addition to the Floris Jermyn Street shop, Floris used to have a shop in exclusive Madison Avenue, New York. Similar in style to the Jermyn Street shop, Floris Madison Avenue was the focus for all Floris sales across the USA.  All product is now sold through London's Apothecary in the United States.
The London store is in Jermyn Street, London in the same building Juan Floris created the business in the 18th Century.  The mahogany counter still used in the store was purchased directly from the Great Exhibition at the Crystal Palace in Hyde Park in 1851.  Many customs still endure today, an example of which is the passing of cash change to customers on a velvet pad; it was considered vulgar in the 18th Century to touch another's hand.

==External links==


