[[ArrayComm]]

CATEGORIES: Companies based in San Jose, California, Companies established in 1992, Antennas

ArrayComm is a wireless communications software company founded in San Jose, California, in Silicon Valley. Co-founded in 1992 by Martin Cooper, a pioneer of the wireless industry. The company is wholly owned by Ygomi LLC, under principal investor T. Russell Shields. The current headquarters is  Buffalo Grove, Illinois.
ArrayComm sells the Physical Layer (PHY) for 4G wireless systems, as well as multi-antenna signal processing software for specific components of 4G PHYs using Smart Antennas and MIMO techniques. Patent-licensing is another source of revenue. The company's hardware solutions enjoyed their greatest commercial successes in Australia and South Africa under the iBurst brand name which continues to be owned by Kyocera.  ArrayComm also achieved significant success in Asia by selling base-station software for Personal Handy-phone System (PHS) base-stations.

==Overview==

The problems ArrayComm are trying to solve can be compared to multiple conversations in a single location, or communications across long distances.
In a crowded room, people find it easy to focus on the person they are speaking to and effectively ignore other conversations. Conversely, a person can try to get the attention of someone down the street by cupping their hands around their mouth, which directs their voice to improve the odds of being heard and understood.
MAS is software that allows wireless systems (both end user devices and carrier equipment) to communicate clearly, by solving performance problems that result from the current inefficient radio 'conversations'. Multiple antennas using this software doubles or quadruples performance, by increasing the selective listening and transmission capabilities.

==Executive timeline==

==Alumni group==

Since inception, the company has had a large contingent of employees who have maintained close contact with each other owing to the paucity of companies in the mobile wireless space. Initially this group was hosted by Yahoo, though more recently it has been reestablished as a LinkedIn Group to facilitate business networking.

==External links==


