[[Brunswick Secondary College]]

CATEGORIES: Rock Eisteddfod Challenge participants, Public schools in Victoria (Australia), High schools in Victoria (Australia), Schools in Melbourne

Brunswick Secondary College is a state secondary school for students in Years 7 to 12, located in the Melbourne suburb of Brunswick. It is one of two government secondary schools located in Brunswick; the other being Sydney Road Community School.

==History==

Brunswick Secondary College was formed during the early 1990s after an amalgamation of Brunswick Technical School, Brunswick Girls School, Brunswick East Secondary School and Brunswick High School. It officially opened in 1995, operating on the former site of Brunswick Technical School. In the 2000s, the school saw a steady improvement in its results in many areas including VCE scores, and as such now attracts students from well beyond its neighbourhood zone. Enrolment as of 2011 is 900. The Northern Metropolitan Region has given approval for the school to grow to 1,100 over the next few years.

===Principals===

==Curriculum==

Brunswick Secondary offers a comprehensive curriculum  from Year 7 to 12, and many electives  and enrichment opportunities. In 2011, it introduced a Victorian Applied Learning Program (VCAL) into the curriculum, partnered with its Victorian Certificate of Education (VCE) curriculum. Brunswick Secondary has an active performing arts program, involved in many different areas including dance, drama, instrumental music, as well as its Rock Eisteddfod participation. The school offers Mandarin Chinese and Italian as its Languages Other Than English. The school also runs a SEAL (Select Entry Accelerated Learning) Program and a VCE Early Start Program. The school participates in the University of Melbourne's Mathematics Extension Program.
In addition to its core curricular subjects, Brunswick Secondary offers a rich extra-curricular program, including: dance, debating, drama, chess, circus, computer art, ceramics, cooking, sports leadership, table tennis, Kendo, woodwork and creative writing. It boasts a high level of participation and achievement in these areas (and subject areas) through competitions.

==Facilities==

Brunswick Secondary has many facilities allowing a wide curriculum with the many electives it offers. A new Year 9 Learning Centre was completed in early 2007 with new computers and teaching rooms with electronic whiteboards, which have since been installed in all classrooms throughout the school. In 2001, it was subject to a multi-million dollar renovation, which saw many new facilities built. Since 2011, the school offers students in Years 10-12 laptops for hire throughout the academic year. The school features an organic garden, an auditorium, a gym and performing arts facilities. The school has a full size synthetic multipurpose field, completed in 2009, that is used by the school during the day and the Brunswick Hockey Club in the evenings.

==Uniform==

Brunswick Secondary has a full school uniform, with a summer and winter uniform for girls and a uniform for boys. It also has a sports uniform, for use during practical physical education classes and during sporting competitions and events.

==Rock Eisteddfod==

In 2011, Brunswick Secondary placed first in the Rock Eisteddfod (Premier Division). In the absence of a Rock Eisteddfod Challenge in 2010, the Victorian Government sponsored a statewide replacement, Vic Moves, in which Brunswick placed first. In 2009, Brunswick Secondary College placed fifth in the Raw Division of the Rock Eisteddfod. In 2008, the school came third in the Premier Grand Final with their performance 'Glitch'. They also received The Edge Award of Excellence for Choreography. They also received a wildcard into the 2008 National TV Special, and received a total score of 25.5 out of 30.
Brunswick Secondary College won the Rock Eisteddfod Challenge 2007 Premier Grand Final with their performance of 'Solstice'. In addition to coming first, they were awarded the following prizes:
In 2006, students from BSC won the Open Division, with their performance of 'Overload' and the 2004 Small School Division, with their performance 'Unanana and the Elephant'. They also made finals in 2005 with their performance Billy the Punk.

==References==

==External links==


