[[Penobscot Theatre Company]]

CATEGORIES: Culture of Bangor, Maine, Theatre companies in Maine, Visitor attractions in Bangor, Maine

Penobscot Theatre Company (PTC), located in Bangor, Maine, is America's Northeastern-most professional theatre company. It operates year-round in the historic Bangor Opera House, producing theatre works and programs. Plays and musicals both new and classic comprise PTC's mainstage season. Beyond the mainstage, Penobscot Theatre's educational and outreach programming is the largest in the state, serving more than 7,000 Maine students through school-based workshops, student matinees, extracurricular offerings, internships, and apprenticeships. PTC's Dramatic Academy offers children and young adults professional training in all aspects of the performing arts, including acting, voice, movement, improvisation, straight play and musical production, and show choir; and workshops and classes for adults. The theatre regularly collaborates with area residents, businesses, and non-profits to offer post-show talk-backs and other programs that complement the theatre's work.
Bari Newport is the company's Artistic Director and Marcie Bramucci is Managing Director. Included in the company are Director of Education Jasmine Ireland, Production Manager Aaron Noble, Stage Manager Meredith Perry, and other professionals. In addition, PTC hires local and visiting artists and artisans throughout the season to meet its production needs.

==History==

Penobscot Theatre Company has its roots in the Acadia Repertory Theatre founded in 1973 by George Vafiadis and Lou Collier. Acadia Repertory Theatre presented 97 productions in Bangor before Penobscot Theatre Company was incorporated as a 501(c)3 on March 17, 1983. The School For Wives was the first play officially produced by PTC.
George Vafiadis served as PTC's Producing Director from 1983 through 1990. Kenneth Stack was PTC's Artistic Director from 1983 to 1989.
In 1986 the greater Bangor community helped Penobscot Theatre raise $160,000 for the purchase and initial renovation of the historic parish house (built in 1888 at 183 Main Street) that it had been renting from the church next door. The theatre sold the parish house to Merrill Bank in 2004.
Joe Turner Cantu became Artistic Director in 1990 and remained in that position through 1992 when Mark Torres was named Producing Artistic Director and stayed in that position for the next 13 seasons. Under Torres' leadership, the theatre reorganized to operate with paid professionals, tripled the budget and increased attendance to more than 15,000 annually. Torres also increased the theatre's activity to include the annual Maine Shakespeare Festival, which performed on the banks of the Penobscot River for seven summers.
In 1997, Penobscot Theatre Company acquired the Bangor Opera House, located at 131 Main Street, which now serves as the company's base of operations. The Opera House was built in 1920 and is an early example of Art Deco/Egyptian Revival architecture.
In 2005, the board hired Scott R.C. Levy as Producing Artistic Director and he served until mid-2011. Under Levy's leadership, Penobscot Theatre Company toured productions throughout the state of Maine, created the Northern Writes New Play Festival, and restored the façade of the Bangor Opera House.
Upon Levy’s departure, the board instituted a new dual leadership structure, and hired Marcie Bramucci as Managing Director and Bari Newport as Artistic Director.

==References==

==External links==


