[[Gilbert Remulla]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, 1970 births, People from Cavite

Gilbert Cesar Remulla (born September 5, 1970) is a Filipino newscaster and politician.

==Biography==

Gilbert is the seventh and youngest child of former Governor Juanito R. Remulla and Ditas Catibayan Remulla. His well-known brothers include Cavite Governor Juanito Victor C. Remulla or "Jonvic" and one time Provincial Board Member and currently Congressman Jesus Crispin Remulla or "Boying." Gilbert spent his childhood in Bel-Air, Makati and Imus, Cavite.
He spent his elementary years in the now defunct De La Salle University Grade School, high school at the Ateneo de Manila and went to the
University of the Philippines Diliman for his college education. As an undergraduate in UP, Gilbert mixed academic excellence with extra-curricular activities. He was National President of AIESEC, and an active member of the Upsilon Sigma Phi Ffaternity.

===Career===

After obtaining a degree in Broadcast Communication in 1993, Remulla joined ABS-CBN as part of its news team. Remulla started as a production assistant, and then became a reporter and a regular in the morning and evening news.
In 1997, Gilbert took up his MA International Affairs with concentration in International Media and Communications at the Columbia University in New York City. His experience in the Ivy League school gave him the opportunity to work for CNN and the United Nations.
Gilbert ran in the Congressional elections of May 2001 and won convincingly against his veteran rivals. He join fellow ABS-CBN co-anhcor Ted Failon of Leyte. Being one of the youngest members of Congress of the Philippines, the time he has spent in office has been marked by comments about his relative youth in comparison to majority of the members of Congress. His legislative portfolio shows noteworthy legislation such as Republic Act 9165, or the Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002, and Republic Act 9287, or the Act Increasing the Penalty for the Illegal Numbers Game. At present, he has a number of bills which are pending in Congress, which include House Bill No. 185 seeking the abolition of the Sangguniang Kabataan and replacing it with a youth representative; House Bill No. 2452 which seeks to lower the cost of cellular phone usage and House Bill No. 5310 which aims at minimizing the use of plastic bags and plastic utensils that damage the environment.
Other than his advocacies for the people of the 2nd District of Cavite, Gilbert is also a strong advocate for population management.
On January 23, 2008, former Senate President Ernesto Maceda, chairman emeritus of UNO announced that United Opposition spokesman Adel Tamano, former Cavite congressman Gilbert Remulla, incumbent Bukidnon congressman Teofisto Guingona III, incumbent Senators Jinggoy Estrada and Jamby Madrigal-Valade are the 2010 senatorial bets of the opposition and "vice presidential materials.”Inquirer.net, Opposition names some senatorial bets in 2010
He ran for senator under Nacionalista Party in the recent election on May 10, 2010 but lost. In 2013 he is running again for congressman, but this time in the 7th district due to his brother Boying is term limited and he ran for mayor of Tagaytay, under  the Nacionalista Party, Lakas-CMD and the United Nationalist Alliance. He will oppose Tagaytay Mayor Bambol Tolentino of the Liberal party.

==Personal life==

In New York City, Remulla met Georgia Isabel Roa, whom he married in Catholic rites in 2000. They have three daughters, Roxanne Margarita, Rocio Isabel and Reanna.

==References==

==External links==


