[[Darryl Cherney]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American environmentalists, Industrial Workers of the World members, People from Humboldt County, California, Activists from California

Darryl Cherney is a musician and environmental activist. He is a member of the Earth First! environmental movement. He lives in Humboldt County, California.
On May 24, 1990, Cherney was slightly injured when a pipe bomb exploded in the car he and fellow activist Judi Bari were traveling in. Bari was severely injured by the explosion. The case was investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), which accused Bari and Cherney of bombing themselves. Bari and Cherney subsequently sued the FBI and Oakland Police agents for violations of the United States Constitution. Cherney and the late Bari's estate were awarded $4.4 million for violations of the First Amendment (freedom of speech) and the Fourth Amendment (the right to be free from unlawful arrest and illegal search and seizure).
Cherney ran for Congress in the 1988 Democratic primary, which is where he met Bari.
Together with Greg King, he co-founded the movement to save what eventually became the federally protected Headwaters Forest Reserve near Eureka, California. He organized four rallies in support of Julia Butterfly Hill's two-year tree sit. With Bari, he organized the Redwood Summer campaign.
He has produced four albums of his own political satire, and founded Environmentally Sound Promotions.
In 2012, he told KHUM radio that he does not consider himself an "extremist," preferring the term "radical."[tpl]citation needed|date=March 2012[/tpl]
In 2012, Cherney's documentary film Who Bombed Judi Bari?http://whobombedjudibari.com/ was released.Judi Bari documentary at film festival There is an ongoing lawsuit against the FBI to prevent it from destroying evidence that could contain the bomber's DNA, and Cherney indicated in a Democracy Now interview that he believes the FBI was guilty of not only framing him and Judi but of a cover-up.Judi Bari Revisited: New Film Exposes FBI Coverup of 1990 Car Bombing (Part 1 of 2) Cherney has stated elsewhere that “I believe the bomber is findable.” In October 2012, Cherney announced a $50,000 reward “for information leading to the identification, arrest, prosecution and incarceration of the person or persons responsible for the attempted assassination of Judi Bari by placing a bomb under the seat of her car.”Tim Phillips, "Earth First! Activist Darryl Cherney Announces Reward for Information Related to Attempted Assassination of Judi Bari", Activist Defense, November 3, 2012.

==External links==

==Notes==


