[[Children's Hospital of New Orleans]]

CATEGORIES: Hospitals in Louisiana, Children's hospitals in the United States, Buildings and structures in New Orleans, Louisiana, Hospitals established in 1955, Healthcare in New Orleans, Louisiana

Children's Hospital of New Orleans is a non-profit children's hospital in New Orleans, Louisiana.  
Children's Hospital offers a wide range of inpatient and outpatient pediatric care, including a Pediatric intensive care unit, Neonatal intensive care unit, and a parenting education center.  As of 2002, it has 201 beds and over 380 pediatricians and pediatric specialists.  The hospital admits over 7,000 inpatient and 170,000 outpatient visits each year.  The hospital services the entire state of Louisiana and Gulf Coast region.  
Children's Hospital is operated as a non-profit organization, run by an independent board of trustees.  It was originally opened as a rehabilitation center for physically handicapped children in 1955 under the name Crippled Children's Hospital.  The facility was expanded into a full-service hospital and given its current name in 1976.  
The main hospital is located in the University District of Uptown New Orleans.  The address is 200 Henry Clay Avenue, New Orleans, Louisiana  70118.  Phone:  (504) 899.9511.  This facility is located along the levee next to the Mississippi River, near the Audubon Zoo and Audubon Park, New Orleans.  There is also satellite clinic in the nearby suburb of Metairie, and Baton Rouge.
Children's Hospital is located near the Mississippi River levee, on the city's old high ground or "sliver by the river" which escaped the flooding of most of the city in the Levee failures in Greater New Orleans, 2005 in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina.  The hospital has its own power generator and remained operational throughout Hurricane Katrina.  It was evacuated on 2005 Sep. 1 when the hospital lost water pressure from the city.  The hospital suffered no flood damage and negligible wind damage during the storm.  It was fully reopened over a month later on 2005 Oct. 10.  
Child Health Corporation of America.  New Orleans Update.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


