[[Kerala Students Union]]

CATEGORIES: Student wings of political parties in India, 1957 establishments in India, Indian National Congress organisations, Politics of Kerala

கேரள மாணவர்கள் அணி  என்பது இந்திய தேசிய காங்ரஸின் மாணவர் அமைப்பான தேசிய மாணவர்கள் அணியின்  கேரள கிளையாகும். KSU 1957-ல் மே 30 அலபுழாவில் நிறுவப்பட்டது  .

==About KSU==

KSU is the largest student organization in Kerala. KSU proposes the idea of student activism based on a Progressive Thought, Secular Vision and Democratic Action. KSU entered the center stage of student politics in Kerala with the famous "Orana Samaram", a strike for travel concessions for students in buses and boats of the state.The agitation was success, and the government had to relent to the demands of KSU. From then onwards, the growth of KSU was tremendous. KSU was only short lived as the rise of SFI (current largest student organisation in Kerala) slowly weakened it and by the late 90s it was over shadowed from the major universities of the state of Kerala.The communist Government led by E. M. S. Namboodiripad, which was the first democratically elected communist government in the world, was suspended from office in 1959 by the congress led central government. Various strikes and agitations were held by KSU against the state government and brought the educational system of the state to a halt by continuously disrupting the classes.
Many of its founder leaders like A.K. Antony, Vayalar Ravi, Oommen Chandy, A.C.Jose, V.M.Sudheeran and M.R.Prasad went up the stairs of INC . It injected fresh blood into the Congress party and a whole generation of new leaders entered into the political arena, a lot of them M.P.s, M.L.A.s and even two Chief Ministers.
The NSUI was formed at the national level taking inspiration from KSU in Kerala and the 'Chhatra parishad' in West Bengal. But KSU suffered some setbacks after the emergency period (1975–77) and consequent split in the Congress party. By then, factionalism in the Congress peeped into this organization also, which made it somewhat weak. And by this time its student support base in campuses had largely eroded and other student organisations had started to emerge in the horizon.
The Kerala Students' Union, or KSU as it is commonly known, is the premier student organization in the state of Kerala. Right from its inception in 1957, it played a leading role in giving the student community of the state a new vision, outlook and a platform for creative academic and social interventions.

==Growth==

KSU entered the center stage of student politics in Kerala with the famous "Orana Samaram", a strike for travel concessions for students in buses and boats owned by the state.
From then onwards, the growth of KSU was tremendous. the main reasons for this growth were the private college managements had  extended 
their support to the KSU.  They were eager  to  encourage the  KSU against the KSF which was antimanagement in  its 
outlook.  Thus the students who were keen to  please  the powerful managements found  an  opportunity for  it  by 
supporting the KSU. 
Secondly, the powerful communities of Kerala like the Nairs  and  Christians too supported the  Kerala Students 
Union.  They  felt threatened by  the utterances  of  the radical KSF leaders who were out to destroy the  managers' 
stronghold  on the educational institutions.  So  the  KSU could  grow  in  the suitable climate of  anticommunist 
feeling which was widespread  during the  liberation struggle. 
Thirdly, the newspapers of Kerala played a crucial role to suit the interests of the KSU.  The  KSU leaders 
and their statements were given the pride of place by them in  these newspapers.  In  other words, most  of  the 
newspapers promoted the interests of the KSU.
Though KSU regularly took up academic issues and put up agitations to achieve the rights of students, its effect was not restricted to the academic field alone. It is perhaps the first student movement in the country, which could overthrow a ruling state government. The communist  regime of EMS was thrown out of office through the agitations and relentless efforts of KSU in alliance with minority religions in 1960. . Many of its former leaders like A.K. Antony, Vayalar Ravi, Oommen Chandy, A.C.Jose, V.M.Sudheeran, G.Karthikeyan and Ramesh Chennithala are still  enjoying power. KSU injected fresh blood into the Congress party and a whole generation of new leaders entered into the political arena, a lot of them to become M.P.s, M.L.A.s and even Chief Ministers.
But KSU suffered some setbacks after the emergency period (1975–77) and consequent split in the Congress party. By then, factionalism in the Congress party peeped into this organization also, which weakened KSU.There onwards KSU lost support from students and losts most university elections.
Under the leadership of Shri. Rahul Gandhi as the AICC general secretary in charge of NSUI  KSU conducted a full-fledged organizational election in 2009 to restore internal democracy.
Kerala Students Union has recently launched its official website that provides more details about the union.
The state of KSU now
Since the stage of its origin,the organisation has a great role over the students of kerala

==Presidents of KSU==

==References==


