[[Azrieli Graduate School of Jewish Education and Administration]]

CATEGORIES: Yeshiva University, Educational institutions established in 1945, Schools of education in New York, 1945 establishments in New York

The Azrieli Graduate School of Jewish Education and Administration, a Yeshiva University professional school, was established in 1945 and named in 1983 for Montréal architect and philanthropist David J. Azrieli. Classes are held at Yeshiva University’s Wilf Campus, in Manhattan’s Washington Heights neighborhood, and Israel Henry Beren Campus, in Manhattan’s Murray Hill neighborhood.
Azrieli’s dean is David J. Schnall, Ph.D., Herbert Schiff Professor of Management and Administration at Yeshiva University’s Wurzweiler School of Social Work. David J. Schnall, PhD

==Academics==

The School is an international center for training Jewish educators for administrative, supervisory, communal, and academic leadership. It offers Master of Science in Jewish Education and a Doctor of Education degrees.
The Director of the Master's Program is Jeffrey Glanz,  Raine and Stanley Silverstein Chair in Professional Ethics and Values. Jeffrey Glanz
There are many Master Degree programs options that allow students to select the best course of study for their educational needs:
Traditional Part-time Program, 
Accelerated Master's Program (1-year start to completion, full-time study),
Summer Program,
Joint BA/MS program from Yeshiva/Stern College,
Legacy Heritage Teacher Training Fellowship,
GiveBack Fellowship  
The Fanya Gottesfeld Heller Division of Doctoral Studies offers three concentrations of doctoral study: educational leadership, psychology of student support, and curriculum and instruction that lead to an EdD. It also offers the Specialist’s Certificate in Administration and Supervision of Jewish Education
Rona Milch Novick is the Director of the Doctoral Program Rona Milch Novick, Phd
Azrieli also sponsors leadership and enrichment programs for teachers and administrators with the goal of improving the quality of Jewish schools. In addition, it publishes a series of monographs dedicated to excellence in research, teaching, and scholarship in Jewish education and PRISM: An Interdisciplinary Journal for Holocaust Educators.

==External links==

==Institute for University-School Partnership==

The Institute for University-School Partnership, a division of the Azrieli Graduate School of Jewish Education and Administration, draws on the intellectual capital and research expertise of Yeshiva University and connectes it strategically and proactively to teachers and leaders in the field of Jewish education.
The Institute offers extensive continuing education for teachers, administrators, lay leaders and other school-based professionals; recruits and places educators; conducts research and development projects in schools; publishes practical, research-based materials; and offers school affordability resources.
Collectively these initiatives improve the academic, behavioral, social, emotional, and religious outcomes for students in Jewish schools, develop more and better quality educators and lay leaders, and create a culture of research and innovation in the field.

