[[Joe M. O'Connell]]

CATEGORIES: 21st-century American novelists, American male novelists, American short story writers, American journalists, Writers from Austin, Texas, American film critics, Living people, Year of birth missing (living people), Male short story writers

Joe M. O'Connell is an American novelist, short story writer and journalist based in Austin, Texas.
Considered an expert on the Texas film scene, his columns about the Texas film industry appeared in the Austin American-Statesman from 2000 to 2004 (titled "On Location"), and currently run in the Dallas Morning News (as "Shot in Texas") and The Austin Chronicle.as Film News His film articles also have been published regularly in the San Antonio Express-News since 1997 and nationally in Variety. He has also contributed to Texas Monthly.Joe O'Connell: Texas Monthly
Born in Austin, Texas, to noted architect William R. O'Connell and nurse Wylma Castleberry O'Connell Ruelke, Joe was raised mainly in Austin, but lived briefly in Northglenn, Colorado, and India. He then went to Southwest Texas State University and received a degree in journalism in 1984. O'Connell worked as a newspaper reporter/editor in various cities around Texas, concentrating on covering government and politics. He later returned to SWT (now known as Texas State University) to earn an MFA in creative writing in 1995 while working long distance with the late, famed short-story writer Andre Dubus.
His first novel, Evacuation Plan, centered in a residential hospice was published in 2007 by Dalton Publishing, won the North Texas Book Festival Award in fiction,North Texas Book Festival Award and was a finalist for the Violet Crown Book Award Violet Crown Book Award given by the Writers' League of Texas. O'Connell's short stories have taken first prize at both the Deep South Writers Conference and the Louzelle Rose Barclay Awards, and have been published in literary journals including The G.W. Review, Confrontation, Lullwater Review and Other Voices.
O'Connell currently teaches writing at St. Edward's University and Austin Community College.teaching at Austin Community College He lives outside Austin, Texas, with his wife and young son.

==References==

==External links==


