[[Bruce Hyman]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, British barristers, Disbarred lawyers, British television producers, British criminals, British radio producers, British people convicted of perverting the course of justice

Bruce Anthony Hyman is a radio and TV producer and the only barrister in 800 years to be sent to prison for attempting to pervert the course of justice.

==Crime==

On Monday 6 August 2007 Hyman was convicted of attempting to pervert the course of justice.
Hyman had been representing a divorced woman fighting for custody of her four-year-old daughter when he tried to falsely incriminate the girl's father. The father, Simon Eades, was applying for increased access to his child.  Hyman had crafted and sent a fraudulent email to the father which appeared to be from a charity campaigning for fathers' rights and whose content appeared to support the father's claim that he should be granted greater access to his daughter. When Eades presented the email in court, Hyman accused him of forgery. Eades' own detective work attempting to clear his name led ultimately to the arrest of Hyman. 
CCTV footage from a computer shop proved that Hyman had sent the email and thus had attempted to falsely incriminate Eades.BBC Radio 4 Today program, Bruce Hyman may today become the first Barrister in British history to go to jail for perverting the course of justice Wednesday 29 August 2007Framed father tells of barrister fake email plot Daily Telegraph, 31-Aug-2007BBC account of Hyman´s conviction 6-Aug-2007FNF newsletter account of Hyman storyWikinews coverage at UK PM's speechwriter awaits sentence 26-Aug-2007The friend of the stars who fell from grace The Observer (Guardian Online),  26-Aug-2007 Hyman's client denied any involvement in Hyman's crime.How my barrister forged evidence against my husband - and now faces jail Mail on Sunday, 9-Sep-2006 On 19 September 2007 Bruce Hyman was jailed for 12 months at Bristol Crown Court, and ordered to pay £3,000 compensation to his victim.Prison term for producer lawyer He was released a few days before Christmas 2007 after serving just over two months of his sentence.Questions asked as crooked legal eagle is freed early In November 2008 Hyman was permanently disbarred by the Bar Standards Board.Notice of disciplinary finding against Bruce Anthony Hyman Bar Standards Board, 10-Nov-2008
At his trial, Hyman produced a character reference from his friend, Sir Mark Potter, who is head of the family division of UK justice. (Hyman had committed his crime in the family court.) A complaint against Sir Mark Potter in this regard was investigated by the Office of Judicial Complaints.http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2008/nov/16/law-judicial-complaints The Observer, Sunday November 16 2008

==Work==

At Above the Title Productions Hyman produced three new radio series of Douglas Adams' The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy in 2003 and 2004, with Helen Chattwell and Dirk Maggs.Above the Title's Hitchhiker's page.Production Diary by Hyman and Dirk Maggs on the BBC Radio 4 website  He also acted as Executive Producer of the BBC Radio 4 programme presented by Clive Anderson called Unreliable Evidence until 2006.  Hyman has written scripts for Johnny Vegas and Angus Deayton.City University Law Society page from 2006 regarding a speaking engagement of Hyman's.

==References==

==External links==


