[[Swan Valley High School]]

CATEGORIES: Public high schools in Michigan, Educational institutions established in 1971, Schools in Saginaw County, Michigan

Swan Valley High School is a public high school located in Saginaw, Michigan, USA.  They are part of the Tri-Valley Central Conference.  Swan Valley has been part of the Mid-Michigan B, TVC East, TVC West, and the TVC Central conferences since its start in 1971. Swan Valley's original mascot was the Panthers which soon changed to the Vikings. When the new high school was built the mascot needed to be changed because there was already a high school in the area that were panthers.  The sports teams of Swan Valley were then divided up between the Vikings and the Valkyries to show individual support for both male and female teams. Later the sports teams were simply called the Vikings and the Lady Vikes.  The school now runs on a trimester based year changing from using semesters after Superintendent Dr. Syrek retired.

==Sports==

Swan Valley High School offers several Men's and Women's Freshman, Junior Varsity, and Varsity sports, including:
Swan Valley has a rich history of athletics, which aim to teach sportsmanship and physical fitness for the student athletes.  Since 1972 Swan Valley's varsity football team has accumulated a regular season record of 248 wins and 120 losses (.674 winning percentage). In 2006 the Varsity football team won the conference, district, and regional championships. They also earned a final four appearance and had 2 all-state selections. That same year the girl's basketball team won the district championship, the wrestling team won the conference championship and sent 4 wrestlers to the state finals with BJ Suitor going undefeated for the year. In 2007 the girls softball team won the district and regional championships with 2 all-state selections, and the boys track team won the regional championship. They came in 4th at the team state meet and 3rd at individual state meet netting 10 all-state runners.  Three Seniors were awarded Academic All-State honors.  The school added Varsity Bowling in 2003. In 2008 the girls varsity bowling team went undefeated and won the state championship. From 1986-2003 the Girls softball team won the conference championship all but three years. In 2009, the varsity football team won district and regional championships final four appearance. This football team also produced one all-state selection and two all-state honorable mention players.

==Clubs==

Swan Valley High School offers some clubs and organizations including Band, Drama, media center, Scientific Sorcerers, Student Council, Students Against Destructive Decisions, Business Professionals of America, National Honor Society, International Club, student store, Quiz Bowl, and Breakfast Club which is a morning workout club intended to keep athletes in shape during the winter.

==Awards==

Swan Valley High School has been awarded the Michigan Blue Ribbon Exemplary School Award 2005-2006. Blue Ribbon Schools are models of both excellence and equity. 
To be recognized, a school must demonstrate a strong commitment to educational excellence for all students.  The program recognizes schools that have demonstrated success in achieving these values as well as schools that have overcome obstacles and can provide evidence of five years of sustained student achievement.

==Demographic and administrative information==

Swan Valley's student to teacher ratio is 19 students to every 1 teacher.  93% of the students are white, 3% black, 3% Hispanic, and 1% other.  25% of the students receive free or reduced lunch and the average attendance rate for the school is 95%.  Swan Valley spends $7,279 per-pupil with 65% going to instructional costs, 8% to student and staff support, 12% to administration and 15% for other.  Currently Swan Valley offers two Advanced Placement classes (Literature & Composition and Calculus) but others are offered as an independent study.  The Michigan Department of Education gave Swan Valley High School an "A" for the Michigan Education "YES!" program.

==See also==


