[[Zeno of Citium]]

CATEGORIES: 334 BC births, 262 BC deaths, 3rd-century BC Greek people, 3rd-century BC philosophers, Ancient Cypriots, Ancient Greek philosophers, Cypriot educators, Cypriot writers, Phoenician people, Hellenistic-era philosophers, Stoic philosophers, People from Larnaca, Pantheists

[tpl]About|the Greek philosopher|other uses|Zeno (disambiguation)[tpl]![/tpl]Zeno[/tpl]

Zeno of Citium ([tpl]IPAc-en|ˈ|z|iː|n|oʊ[/tpl]; [tpl]lang-el|Ζήνων ὁ Κιτιεύς[/tpl], Zēnōn ho Kitiéŭs; c. 334 – c. 262 BC) was a Greek thinkerZeno-Of-Citium Britanicca from Citium ([tpl]lang|el|Κίτιον[/tpl], Kition), Cyprus. He was possibly of Phoenician descent.Edwyn Bevan, Stoics and Sceptics Zeno was the founder of the Stoic school of philosophy, which he taught in Athens from about 300 BC. Based on the moral ideas of the Cynics, Stoicism laid great emphasis on goodness and peace of mind gained from living a life of Virtue in accordance with Nature. It proved very successful, and flourished as the dominant philosophy from the Hellenistic period through to the Roman era.

==Life==

Zeno was born c. 334 BC,[tpl]Ref label|A|a|none[/tpl] in Citium in Cyprus. Most of the details known about his life come from the anecdotes preserved by Diogenes Laërtius in his Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers. Diogenes relates a legend that Zeno was a merchant; after surviving a shipwreck, Zeno wandered into a bookshop in Athens and was attracted to some writings about Socrates.Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 2,28,31-32 He asked the librarian how to find such a man. In response, the librarian pointed to Crates of Thebes, the most famous Cynic living at that time in Greece.Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 2-3 
Zeno is described as a haggard, tanned person,Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 1 living a spare, ascetic life.Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 26-27 This coincides with the influences of Cynic teaching, and was, at least in part, continued in his Stoic philosophy. From the day Zeno became Crates’s pupil, he showed a strong bent for philosophy, though with too much native modesty to assimilate Cynic shamelessness. Hence Crates, desirous of curing this defect in him, gave him a potful of lentil-soup to carry through the Ceramicus; and when he saw that Zeno was ashamed and tried to keep it out of sight, with a blow of his staff, Crates broke the pot. As Zeno began to run off in embarrassment with the lentil-soup flowing down his legs, Crates chided “Why run away, my little Phoenician?”, “nothing terrible has befallen you.”Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 3 
Apart from Crates, Zeno studied under the philosophers of the Megarian school, including Stilpo,Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 2, 24 and the dialecticians Diodorus Cronus,Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 16, 25 and Philo.Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 16 He is also said to have studied Platonist philosophy under the direction of Xenocrates,Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 2; but note that Xenocrates died 314/13 BC and Polemo.Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 2, 25
Zeno began teaching in the colonnade in the Agora of Athens known as the Stoa Poikile (Greek Στοὰ Ποικίλη) in 301 BC. His disciples were initially called Zenonians, but eventually they came to be known as Stoics, a name previously applied to poets who congregated in the Stoa Poikile.Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 5
Among the admirers of Zeno was king Antigonus II Gonatas of Macedonia,Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 6-9, 13-15, 36; Epictetus, Discourses, ii. 13. 14-15; Simplicius, in Epictetus Enchiridion, 51; Aelian, Varia Historia, ix. 26 who, whenever he came to Athens, would visit Zeno. Zeno is said to have declined an invitation to visit Antigonus in Macedonia, although their supposed correspondence preserved by LaërtiusDiogenes Laërtius, vii. 6-9 is undoubtably the invention of a later rhetorician. Zeno instead sent his friend and disciple Persaeus, who had lived with Zeno in his house.Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 13, comp. 36 Among Zeno's other pupils there were Aristo of Chios, Sphaerus, and Cleanthes who succeeded Zeno as the head (scholarch) of the Stoic school in Athens.Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 37
Zeno is said to have declined Athenian citizenship when it was offered to him, fearing that he would appear unfaithful to his native land,Plutarch, de Stoicor. repugn, p. 1034; comp. Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 12 where he was highly esteemed.Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 6 We are also told that Zeno was of an earnest, if not gloomy disposition;Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 16, comp. 26; Sidonius Apollinaris, Epistles, ix. 9 that he preferred the company of the few to the many;Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 14 that he was fond of burying himself in investigations;Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 15 and that he had a dislike to verbose and elaborate speeches.Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 18, 22 Diogenes Laërtius has preserved many clever and witty remarks by Zeno,Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 18-25 the veracity of which cannot be ascertained.
Zeno died around 262 BC.[tpl]Ref label|A|a|none[/tpl] Laërtius reports about his death: 
During his lifetime, Zeno received appreciation for his philosophical and pedagogical teachings. Among other things, Zeno was honored with the golden crown,Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 6, 11 and a tomb was built in honor of his moral influence on the youth of his era.Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 10-12
The crater Zeno on the Moon is named in his honor.

==Philosophy==

Following the ideas of the Academics, Zeno divided philosophy into three parts: Logic (a very wide subject including rhetoric, grammar, and the theories of perception and thought); Physics (not just science, but the divine nature of the universe as well); and Ethics, the end goal of which was to achieve happiness through the right way of living according to Nature. Because Zeno's ideas were built upon by Chrysippus and other Stoics, it can be difficult to determine, in some areas, precisely what he thought, but his general views can be outlined:

===Logic===

In his treatment of Logic, Zeno was influenced by Stilpo and the other Megarians. Zeno urged the need to lay down a basis for Logic because the wise person must know how to avoid deception.Cicero, Academica, ii. 20. Cicero accused Zeno of being inferior to his philosophical predecessors in his treatment of Logic,Cicero, de Finibus, iv. 4. and it seems true that a more exact treatment of the subject was laid down by his successors, including Chrysippus.Sextus Empiricus, adv. Math. vii. 253. Zeno divided true conceptions into the comprehensible and the incomprehensible,Cicero, Academica, ii. 6, 24. permitting for free-will the power of assent (sunkatathesis/συγκατάθεσις) in distinguishing between sense impressions.Cicero, Academica, i. 11. Zeno said that there were four stages in the process leading to true knowledge, which he illustrated with the example of the flat, extended hand, and the gradual closing of the fist:
 Zeno stretched out his fingers, and showed the palm of his hand, – "Perception," – he said, – "is a thing like this."-  
 Then, when he had closed his fingers a little, – "Assent is like this." – Afterwards, when he had completely closed his hand, and showed his fist, that, he said, was Comprehension. From which simile he also gave that state a new name, calling it katalepsis (κατάληψις). But when he brought his left hand against his right, and with it took a firm and tight hold of his fist: – "Knowledge" – he said, was of that character; and that was what none but a wise person possessed.Cicero, Academica, ii. 4.

===Physics===

The Universe, in Zeno's view, is God:Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 148. a divine reasoning entity, where all the parts belong to the whole.Sextus Empiricus, adv. Math. ix. 104, 101; Cicero, de Natura Deorum, ii. 8.  Into this pantheistic system he incorporated the physics of Heraclitus; the Universe contains a divine artisan-fire, which foresees everything,Cicero, de Natura Deorum, ii. 22. and extending throughout the Universe, must produce everything:
 Zeno, then, defines nature by saying that it is artistically working fire, which advances by fixed methods to creation. For he maintains that it is the main function of art to create and produce, and that what the hand accomplishes in the productions of the arts we employ, is accomplished much more artistically by nature, that is, as I said, by artistically working fire, which is the master of the other arts. 
This divine fire, or aether,Cicero, Academica, ii. 41. is the basis for all activity in the Universe,Cicero, de Natura Deorum, ii. 9, iii. 14. operating on otherwise passive matter, which neither increases nor diminishes itself.Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 150. The primary substance in the Universe comes from fire, passes through the stage of air, and then becomes water: the thicker portion becoming earth, and the thinner portion becoming air again, and then rarefying back into fire.Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 142, comp. 136. Individual souls are part of the same fire as the world-soul of the Universe.Cicero, Tusculanae Quaestiones, i. 9, de Natura Deorum, iii. 14; Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 156. Following Heraclitus, Zeno adopted the view that the Universe underwent regular cycles of formation and destruction.Stobaeus, Ecl. Phys. i.
The Nature of the Universe is such that it accomplishes what is right and prevents the opposite,Cicero, de Natura Deorum, i. 14. and is identified with unconditional Fate,Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 88, 148, etc., 156. while allowing it the free-will attributed to it.

===Ethics===

Like the Cynics, Zeno recognised a single, sole and simple good,Cicero, Academica, i. 16. 2. which is the only goal to strive for.Cicero, de Finibus, iii. 6. 8; comp. Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 100, etc. "Happiness is a good flow of life," said Zeno,Stobaeus, 2.77. and this can only be achieved through the use of right Reason coinciding with the Universal Reason (Logos), which governs everything. A bad feeling (pathos) "is a disturbance of the mind repugnant to Reason, and against Nature."Cicero, Tusculanae Quaestiones, iv. 6. This consistency of soul, out of which morally good actions spring, is Virtue,Cicero, Tusculanae Quaestiones, iv. 15. true good can only consist in Virtue.Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 102, 127.
Zeno deviated from the Cynics in saying that things that are morally indifferent could nevertheless have value. Things have a relative value in proportion to how they aid the natural instinct for self-preservation.Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 85; Cicero, de Finibus, iii. 5, 15, iv. 10, v. 9, Academica, i. 16. That which is to be preferred is a "fitting action" (kathêkon/καθῆκον), a designation Zeno first introduced.Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 108. Self-preservation, and the things that contribute towards it, has only a conditional value; it does not aid happiness, which depends only on moral actions.Cicero, de Finibus, iii. 13.
Just as Virtue can only exist within the dominion of Reason, so Vice can only exist with the rejection of Reason. Virtue is absolutely opposed to Vice,Cicero, Tusculanae Quaestiones, iv. 13, Academica, i. 10, de Finibus, iii. 21, iv. 9, Parad. iii. 1; Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 127. the two cannot exist in the same thing together, and cannot be increased or decreased;Cicero, de Finibus, iii. 14, etc. no one moral action is more virtuous than another.Cicero, de Finibus, iii. 14; Sextus Empiricus, adv. Math. vii. 422. All actions are either good or bad, since impulses and desires rest upon free consent,Cicero, Tusculanae Quaestiones, iv. 9, Academica, i. 10. and hence even passive mental states or emotions that are not guided by reason are immoral,Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 110; Cicero, Tusculanae Quaestiones, iv. 6. 14. and produce immoral actions.Cicero, de Finibus, iv. 38; Plutarch, de Virt. mor. Zeno distinguished four negative emotions: desire, fear, pleasure and pain (epithumia, phobos, hêdonê, lupê / ἐπιθυμία, φόβος, ἡδονή, λύπη),Cicero, Tusculanae Quaestiones, iv. 6; Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 110. and he was probably responsible for distinguishing the three corresponding positive emotions: will, caution, and joy (boulêsis, eulabeia, chara / βούλησις, εὐλάβεια, χαρά), with no corresponding rational equivalent for pain. All errors must be rooted out, not merely set aside,Cicero, Tusculanae Quaestiones, iv. 18, etc. and replaced with right Reason.

==Works==

None of Zeno's writings have survived except as fragmentary quotations preserved by later writers. However, the titles of many of Zeno's writings are known and are as follows:Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 4.
The most famous of these works was Zeno's Republic, a work written in conscious imitation of (or opposition to) Plato. Although it has not survived, more is known about it than any of his other works. It outlined Zeno's vision of the ideal Stoic society built on egalitarian principles.

==Notes==

 
 a. [tpl]Note label|A|a|none[/tpl] The dates for Zeno's life are controversial. According to Apollodorus, as quoted by Philodemus, Zeno died in Arrheneides' archonship (262/1 BC). According to Persaeus (Diogenes Laërtius vii. 28), Zeno lived for 72 years. His date of birth is thus 334/3 BC. A plausible chronology for his life is as follows: He was born 334/3 BC, and came to Athens in 312/11 BC at the age of 22 (Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 28). He studied philosophy for about 10 years (Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 2); opened his own school during Clearchus' archonship in 301/0 BC (Philodemus, On the Stoics, col. 4); and was the head of the school for 39 years and 3 months (Philodemus, On the Stoics, col. 4), and died 262/1 BC. For more information see William Scott Ferguson, (1911), Hellenistic Athens: An Historical Essay, page 185.; and Tiziano Dorandi, Chronology in K. Algra et al., (2005), The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy, page 38.

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==


