[[Book of Tink]]

CATEGORIES: American plays

Book of Tink is a dramatic and musical text written by playwright Erik Ehn. An original score was written by Director/Composer Josh Chambers. Another original score was written for the 2009 Doane College production, co-composed by Zach Kloppenborg (Director) and Rebecca Wilson (Assistant Director/Music Director) with Scenic Design by Joshua Rajaee. Mazie Wilson composed the UC Irvine production's music. Erik Ehn recently served as the dean of the school of theater at California Institute of the Arts, but has now taken over the Playwriting program at Brown University, a position most recently held by Paula Vogel. Josh Chambers, a founding member of the Fovea Floods Theater Company based in New York http://www.foveafloods.com/, directed and composed music for a production of Book of Tink at California Institute of the Arts in the Spring of 2005.

==Understanding "Tink"==

Book of Tink is a re-interpretation of the classic children's novel Peter Pan and Wendy by JM Barrie. In Ehn's poetically stylized interpretation, the Book of Revelation and the novel Peter Pan and Wendy are woven together. The fantasy characters from Barrie's 1904 novel are dramatically re-imagined by Ehn. Peter Pan, Captain Hook, The Lost Boys, The Mermaid Prostitutes, The Darling Children: Wendy, John, Michael, and the Darling's dog Nana are all reincarnated into the story along with a chorus of fairies led by the notorious Tinkerbell, and an oversized baby becomes a symbol of innocence in the play. Ehn attempts to illustrate the 'savagery of innocence' in "Tink". The character of Wendy is written as a manipulative, controlling, and ultimately lethal player in the story. She sews Peter into reality threatening the existence of Never Never Land, referred to as Maybe Land initially in the play. Peter and the Lost Boys are a fraternity of corrupt juveniles susceptible to Wendy's powers. The mermaid prostitutes act as sirens as they sing some of the most important lyrics of the play. The dog Nana is an essential part of the story, as she narrates a majority of the key story elements. The chorus of fairies serve as a driving force in the plot of the play with Tinkerbell as their rebellious leader.
The dense, poetic language of "Tink" makes the plot somewhat difficult to discern, though it adheres closely to the J. M. Barrie novel. Many phrases and words are repeated throughout, and metal-working is constantly used as a metaphor (Tinker Bell is a tinker, a metal-smith). The phrase "You pound my heart in the forge of your love," and several variations, act as a basis for much of the language in "Book of Tink." This emphasizes a strong idea explored in the play: the need for human contact, through which we are reshaped.
Still unpublished, "Book of Tink" is continuing to pursue future productions after its two successful mountings at Skidmore College in Saratoga Springs, NY; a mounting at the Walt Disney Modular Theater at California Institute of the Arts in Valencia, CA (Directed by Josh Chambers); a production in 2009 at University of California, Irvine (Directed by Jim Knipple); at Doane College in Crete, NE (Directed by Zach Kloppenborg with scenic design by Joshua Rajaee); and its latest production by Red Egg Theater at the Broadway Playhouse in Santa Cruz, CA (Directed by Gina Marie Hayes).

