[[Urkiola]]

CATEGORIES: Geography of Biscay, Basque mountains

Urkiola is a mountain range of the Basque mountains in Biscay near Durango, in the western Basque Country, Spain. The range's highest mountain is Anboto (1331 m). The range runs from west to east and forms the water divide of the Atlantic and the Mediterranean basins.
It was declared "Natural park" on 29 december 1989 because the Basque government wanted to protect the variety of wildlife and flora that it has. In the center of this natural park exists a church which it is called Santuario de Urkiola. This is the church of the Saints Antonios Abad and De Padua. It is one of the most beautiful and visited Basque churches.
The Basque mithology takes part in this natural park too. Some people thinks that on one of the sides of the Anboto mountain there is the face of the Basque god Mari. 

==Mountains==

It is formed by several limestone massifs, from west to east:
At this point of the range the Urkiolamendi pass breaks through it at a height of 711 m, where a Sanctuary was built.
To the south of the limestone peaks are two round shaped mounts, called Saibigain and Urkiolamendi (1011 m).
The entire area is enclosed in the Urkiola Natural Park, created by the Basque Government to preserve this rich natural area, often known as Little Switzerland. The closeness to Bilbao and easy access through Urkiolamendi pass attract many tourists and hikers all year round.

==History==

There are evidences that the Roman empire has passed through Urkiola. Some archaeologists have found pieces of ceramic in the coast, near the ruins of a Roman village. Above these ruins now exists a Basque village called Forua, name that comes from "foro". 
In Ma침aria archaeologist have found a lot of proofs which demostrate that visigoths used to live in that part of the mountain range. This could happen due to the fights that the christians had had against the muslims near Vitoria. Some tablets have been found in Elorrio, proof of the christian presence in the valleys. 
In the Middle Ages the pastoral activity was common in the mountains and there were a lot of villages in the valleys. There were no people living on the top of the mountains, but there was a militar base located on the top of the mountain "Aitz txiki". 
There were a lot of churches in Urkiola in the 10th century. One of the most important evidences of that is a letter from the king of Pamplona N치jera G치rcia S치nchez who says that the churches of Durango are allowed. There are more letters of some abbots of churches like the one which is in Abadiano. 

==External links==


