[[Ebrahim Desai]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Year of birth missing (living people), South African Muslims, Deobandis, Deobandi ulama, South African imams, South African Sufis

Ebrahim Desai is a South African, Deobandi Muslim Grand Mufti of Indian origin and a teacher of Islamic law based in Durban, Sherwood, South Africa. He runs the fatwa website Ask ImamAskImam About us page an online Islamic questions and answers (Q&A) database and used to head the Dar al-Ifta of Madrasah In'aamiyyah, Camperdown as the principal mufti as well as used to be the senior lecturer of Hadith (Shaykh al-Hadith) thereStaff at Madrassah In'amiyyah Camperdown He currently heads the Darul iftaa in Sherwood, Durban, South Africa and is the oversight for the Fatwa Department of Jamiatul Ulama KZN.

==Biography==

After completing the memorization (hifz) of the Qur'an at the Watervaal Islamic Institute (Mia's Farm), Desai engaged in study of the Islamic sciences at the hundred year old seminary of Deobandi persuasion, in Dabhel, India at the prestigious Jamia Islamia. Here, he studied the Darse Nizami curriculum for nine years, which included the study of Qur'anic Tafsir, Usul al-Tafsir, Hadith, Usul al-Hadith, Usul al-Fiqh (Principles of Islamic jurisprudence) according to the Hanafi school of Islamic law and Arabic language.
After completing his study in Darse Nizami, Mufti Ebrahim Desai pursued a takhassus (specialization) course in Ifta under Shaykh Ahmad Khanpuri of Dabhel for two years. There he learned the principles of issuing fatwa. After the completing of this course, he completed another year of studies in Ifta under the late mufti of India, Mahmud al-Hasan Gangohi, the author of the multivolume Fatawa Mahmudiyya.About Mufti Ebrahim Desai at Dar al-Mahmood

==Activities and work==

In the past he has held workshops on matters related to Islamic Finance and Shari'ah-Compliance in business and trade in the United States.Report on Islamic Banking and Finance in the United States In March 2008 he traveled to Hong Kong, China to deliver a lecture as a guest speaker to students at the Islamic Kasim Tuet Memorial College (IKTMC)."A inspirational talk was held for S.1 and S.2 students on 26-03-2008." IKTMC
He also serves as a religious advisor to the Islamic Food and Nutrition Council of America (IFANCA).Page 2 on IFANCA Magazine
In his role as an authority in Islamic finance, Desai has taken a strict stance on "Shar'iah Compliance" of certain banks and institutions. His opinion shunning the transparency of Al Baraka Bank (South Africa) in Islamic finance activities has generated much discussion among the Muslim community in South Africa.The Voice of the Cape March 26, 2007 Albaraka fatwa an old battle 
In 2005, Desai was elected to the working committee of the South African Islamic Financial Services Authority (SAIFSA).The Voice of the Cape May 10, 2007
He has said that jihad is acceptable against a country that doesn't allow Islam to be propagated to its citizens.Spencer, Robert, Religion of peace?: why Christianity is and Islam isn't, p. 40, Regnery Publishing, 2007, ISBN 1-59698-515-1, ISBN 978-1-59698-515-5
In relation to his work with issuing fatwas at his website Ask-Imam, Desai often finds himself in situations, where he sounds less like a religious leader and more like a physician's assistant or sex therapist.Pittsburgh Post-Gazette May 22, 2006 Fatwas: Muslim religious edicts are rarely about violence, war

==Publications==

Desai has authored two books, “Introduction to Hadīth: A general introduction to Hadīth and its sciences” and “Introductions to Islamic Commerce”. His fatawa have been compiled in a book titled “Al-Mahmood”. Another compilation of his talks at the Shariah Compliant Business Campaign is also available titled “Shariah Compliant Business Campaign”. The latest compilation of contemporary verdicts is also available titled “Contemporary Fatawa”.

==References==

==See also==

==External links==


