[[L. C. Bird High School]]

CATEGORIES: 1978 establishments in Virginia, Chesterfield County Public Schools, Educational institutions established in 1978, Public high schools in Virginia

Lloyd C. Bird High School is a public high school in Chesterfield, an unincorporated community in Chesterfield County, Virginia, United States.  It is part of Chesterfield County Public Schools and is located at 10301 Courthouse Road.thumb|220px|alt=text|Map of Virginia highlighting Chesterfield County

==Accreditation==

Lloyd C. Bird High School has consistently reached AYP according to the standards of No Child Left Behind each year since the inception of the program. Lloyd C. Bird High School also is the home of the Governor's Career and Technical Academy for Engineering Studies unique to Chesterfield County. The performing arts programs puts on plays, concerts, and displays.

==Athletics==

The mascot is a skyhawk and the sports teams play in the  conference 12 and 5A South. They were members of the Central Region and Dominion District before VHSL realignment. The Skyhawks' most notable team sport is varsity football. Bird won the last VHSL Division 6 State Championship in 2012 (before realignment) with a 14-0 record. They repeated as state champions in 2013 with a 15-0 record, this time in class 5A.  They are ranked 11th nationally (through 2013) by winning percentage (325-85-2 .791) of all the high schools in the United States with over 300 games played. They have also won 25 district championships in 36 years of play and have won the Dominion District football championship for the past 13 consecutive years. The football team is 60-4 since 2009 with a 49-1 record in the regular season and 11-3 record in playoffs. 
Lloyd C. Bird has also been to the state playoffs in many other sports including baseball, boys and girls basketball and many others.

==Notable alumni==

==Lloyd C. Bird High School Band==

The Lloyd C. Bird High School Band, which has 130 members, is one of the larger high school bands in the Commonwealth of Virginia. The Lloyd C. Bird Band is well known for its 21 year consecutive achievement of obtaining a "superior" rating at the VBODA State Concert Festival. The Lloyd C. Bird Band also has held its spring concert in Richmond's Landmark Theater, the only high school band to ever hold a solo concert there. The band is also a 14-time Commonwealth of Virginia Honor band, which makes them one of only 25 bands in the Commonwealth of Virginia to achieve 10 Honor Band Awards. Also part of the Lloyd C. Bird High School Band is the Skyhawk Marching Band. The Skyhawk Marching Band is known as "The Band With The Sound." They compete in the AAAA group at competitions and have achieved 14 "superior" ratings at the VBODA State Marching Festival. The Skyhawk Marching Band has traveled to many places including Disney World, Atlanta, Georgia, Myrtle Beach, Gatlinburg, Tennessee, Chicago, Illinois, and Ontario, Canada.

==Governor's Academy for Engineering Studies==

Lloyd C. Bird was host of the Pre-Engineering Specialty Center for Chesterfield County, a specific application of the Specialty Center System in Chesterfield County high schools which allows students to attend High Schools outside of their districts to get an education concentrating in an area they are interested in along with earning their High School diploma. In 2009, the center was awarded the prestigious title of the Governor's Academy for Engineering Studies.

==References==


