[[Quintus Fabius Maximus]]

CATEGORIES: Roman Republican consuls, 45 BC deaths, 1st-century BC Romans, Government of Roman Macedonia, Year of birth missing

Quintus Fabius Maximus (possibly Quintus Fabius Maximus Sanga)Broughton, T.R.S., The Magistrates of the Roman Republic, Vol III, pg. 86 (died December 31, 45 BC) was a general and politician of the late Roman Republic who became suffect consul in 45 BC.

==Biography==

Maximus was a member of the patrician gens Fabia. He first came to notice in 59 BC when, together with Marcus Caelius Rufus, he prosecuted Gaius Antonius Hybrida for extortion in his province of Macedonia. Although Cicero served as lead counsel for the defense, Fabius Maximus and Caelius Rufus were successful.Smith, pg. 995  He was elected Curule aedile in 57 BC, during which time he restored the Fornix Fabianus (Arch of Fabius).Broughton, pg. 200  Sometime prior to 48 BC, he was elected Praetor.Broughton, pg. 272  In 46 BC, he was one of Julius Caesar's legates who fought in the civil war.Broughton, pg. 300 Maximus was sent by Caesar to Hispania along with Quintus Pedius in command of the troops sent from Sardinia to deal with the Pompeians, who were led by Gnaeus Pompeius.Holmes, pg. 296
Once there, they were unwilling to risk battle with Pompeius's superior numbers, and so remained encamped at Oculbo, waiting for Caesar to arrive in person.Holmes, pg. 542  Joining Caesar, they defeated Pompeius at the Battle of Munda on March 17, 45 BC.  After the victory, Caesar left Maximus to besiege the town of Munda, which he took and may have destroyed.Holmes, pgs. 308 & 546  He then marched against the town of Ursao.Holmes, pg. 546
He returned to Rome along with Caesar, and in reward for his service, after Caesar abdicated his sole consulship in September, he installed Maximus with Gaius Trebonius as suffect consuls on 1 October, 45 BC,Broughton, pg. 303;Smith, pg. 995 the people following Caesar's wishes by voting in his candidates.Holmes, pg. 328 Anti-Caesarean Roman citizens showed their displeasure when Maximus entered a theatre and his lictors asked for the audience members to stand, they shouted "He is no consul".Holmes, pg. 329  Maximus then celebrated his Roman triumph for his victories in Spain on October 13, 45 BC.Broughton, pg. 303  Fabius Maximus died December 31, 45 BC — the last day of his consulship.Syme, pg. 69  He was replaced for the remaining hours of the year by Gaius Caninius Rebilus.Broughton, pg. 304

==Sources==

==Notes==


