[[Coloman of Stockerau]]

CATEGORIES: 10th-century births, 1012 deaths, 11th-century Christian saints, Medieval Irish saints on the Continent, 11th-century Christian martyrs, Christian martyrs of the Middle Ages, 11th-century Irish people, Medieval Gaels, 11th-century Austrian people, Austrian Roman Catholic saints, Austrian people of Irish descent, People from Korneuburg District, Incorrupt saints

Saint Coloman of Stockerau (died  October 18, 1012), is a saint of the Catholic Church.
Originally known as Colmán (variously rendered Koloman, Kálmán, Colman, and Colomannus), he was an Irish pilgrim en route to the Holy Land "was mistaken for a spy because of his strange appearance, tortured, and hanged at Stockerau, near Vienna, Austria, on 16 July 1012. Later tradition has it that he was a son of Máel-Sechnaill (d. 1022), high king of Ireland." (Breen, 2009)
At the time of his death, there were continual skirmishes among Austria, Moravia, and Bohemia. Coloman spoke no German, so he could not give an understandable account of himself. He was hanged alongside several robbers.
According to Aidan Breen, "He was made a saint by the local people, possibly out of remorse for the deed and because of his endurance under torture and the many miracle reported from where his body was buried." (Breen, 2009)

==Veneration==

On 13 October 1014, his relics were transferred to the Abbey of Melk by Bishop Megingard at the request of Marquis Saint Henry of Austria, however, decades later were taken to Hungary.  Coloman became the object of a popular cult and many churches and chapels in Austria, Swabia, the Electorate of the Palatinate, Hungary, and Bavaria are dedicated to him.  He is also venerated in Ireland.
A legend states that Coloman's body remained incorrupt for eighteen months, and remained undisturbed by birds and beasts.  The scaffolding itself is said to have taken root and to have blossomed with green branches, one of which is preserved under the high altar of the Franciscan church at Stockerau.
His reliques were taken to Hungary in the middle of the 11th century, and the King Géza I of Hungary named one of his sons in his honor (King Coloman of Hungary). Later, in the 13th, the younger brother of the King Béla IV of Hungary was  Coloman of Galicia-Lodomeria, receiving also this name in honor to this Saint.
However soon the relics of Saint Coloman were taken again back from the Cathedral of Székesfehérvár, and safely delivered to the Melk Abbey in Austria were nowadays are still kept. Many Austrian rulers made modifications to the tomb of this saint, and the actual reliquary was made in baroque style.

==See also==

==References==

"Coloman (Colmán)", by Aidan Breen, page 696, volume two, Dictionary of Irish Biography, 2009. 

==External links==


