[[Adas Israel Congregation (Duluth, Minnesota)]]

CATEGORIES: Russian-Jewish culture in the United States, Synagogues in Minnesota, Duluth–Superior metropolitan area, Lithuanian-Jewish culture in the United States, Orthodox synagogues in the United States, Buildings and structures in Duluth, Minnesota, Modern Orthodox synagogues, Russian-American culture in Minnesota, Ukrainian-American culture in Minnesota, Ukrainian-Jewish culture in the United States

Adas Israel Congregation (or Adath Israel Congregation, but known locally as the 3rd Street Shul) is a Modern Orthodox Jewish synagogue located in Duluth, Minnesota established in the late 19th century. It is the oldest surviving Orthodox synagogue in Duluth having outlived and incorporated several Orthodox synagogues in the Twin Ports area. By 1973 it was the only Orthodox synagogue in Duluth.They Chose Minnesota: A Survey of the State's Ethnic Groups by June D. Holmquist. St. Paul : Minnesota Historical Society Press, 1981. ISBN 978-0-87351-155-1
It could also be described as a Jewish "traditionalist" congregation because in official communal guidelines it is officially described as "an Orthodox/high Conservative congregation" meaning that its members are composed of some Orthodox Jews as well as those who practice an older form of traditional Judaism.See Union for Traditional Judaism (UTJ) a movement of Modern Orthodox congregations that have joined with traditionalist Conservative ones. It is described as having "a membership of 75. Services are lay-led with daily minyans, Saturday morning and holiday services.Adas Israel of Duluth (Orthodox): Community Directory / Community Calendar (jewishminnesota.org)
While the congregation maintains a synagogue on Duluth's East 3rd Street, they share a building with Temple Israel, a Reform Judaism congregation, for their youth programs.

==Geography and membership==

Duluth is a seaport city in the U.S. state of Minnesota and the county seat of St. Louis County. It forms a metropolitan area with Superior, Wisconsin, Called the Twin Ports, these two cities share the Duluth-Superior Harbor and together are one of the most important ports on the Great Lakes, shipping coal, iron ore (taconite),  and grain. This unique location attracted Jewish settlers who set up a number of synagogues that still serve Jews from the surrounding areas:

==Community and synagogue history==

The origins of this synagogue are tied in with the earliest settlement of Minnesota by Jews fleeing persecutions in Eastern Europe, such as from Russia, Lithuania, Ukraine and Hungary in the 19th century. In one published family history, the synagogue's establishment is described as part of the development of Jewish, indeed European, communal life:
Other histories record that:
Female members of the congregation were active with social, humanitarian and charitable causes. The Adas Israel Ladies' Aid of Duluth are...examples of Orthodox synagogue' women's groups that helped the poor, the sick and the needy as well as their own synagogues."And Prairie Dogs Weren't Kosher: Jewish Women in the Upper Midwest by Linda Mack Schloff (1996). St. Paul : Minnesota Historical Society Press, ©1996. ISBN 0-87351-337-1
In 1930, Adas Israel absorbed the B'nai Israel Synagogue of Duluth.Hebrew class of West Side B'nai Israel Synagogue in Duluth, 1915: Photo taken at a class outing in Lincoln Park in Duluth. B'nai Israel consolidated with congregation Adas Israel in 1930. (Duluth Jewish Historical Society of the Upper Midwest).
Adas Israel is the oldest surviving original synagogue being a continuation of earlier synagogues and a living symbol of a surviving active Jewish community in northeast Minnesota. It was the only surviving Orthodox synagogue, until the establishment of a Chabad Hasidic synagogue in 2001.Adas Israel of Duluth (Orthodox): Community Directory / Community Calendar

==See also==

==References and notes==


