[[Order of Our Lady of Charity]]

CATEGORIES: Roman Catholic female orders and societies, 1641 establishments, Religious organizations established in the 1640s, Roman Catholic organizations established in the 17th century, Christian religious orders established in the 17th century

The Order of Our Lady of Charity (also known as Order of Our Lady of Charity of the Refuge) is a Roman Catholic monastic order, founded in 1641 by Saint John Eudes, at Caen, France.

==History==

Moved by piety for prostitutes, Father John Eudes at first attempted to unite the penitent among them and place them under the care of good and zealous women, but he soon became convinced that the only way of dealing with them was to found a congregation of holy women, who would bind themselves by vow to work for their reformation. Three Visitation nuns came to his aid temporarily, and, in 1644, a house was opened at Caen under the title of Refuge of Our Lady of Charity. Other ladies joined them, and, in 1651, the Bishop of Bayeux gave the institute his approbation. In 1664 a Bull of approbation was obtained from Pope Alexander VII. That same year a house was opened at Rennes, and the institute began to spread. When the French Revolution broke out there were seven communities of the order in France. The convent at Tours were influenced by Saint Mary Euphrasia Pelletier who founded the Magdalen Sisters in Tours and who, in 1829, established the Congregation of Our Lady of Charity of the Good Shepherd in Angers.Steele, Francesca. "Sisters of Our Lady of Charity of the Refuge." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 12. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1911. 12 Jun. 2013
On 8 July 1855, Sister Jerome Tourneux of Rennes, France, established the first Foundation in North America in Buffalo, New York, and thus began the spread of the Mission of Our Lady of Charity in the United States, Canada and Mexico. On 21 March 1979, the North American Union Sisters of Our Lady of Charity received its approval from the Holy See."About the Sisters of Our Lady of Charity", North American Union Sisters of Our Lady of Charity
The sisters came to England in 1863 and by 1910 had houses at Bartestree, Waterlooville, Monmouth, Southampton, and Northfield.
In Ireland they had two houses at Dublin. In Ireland, the Sisters of Charity of Our Lady of Refuge was one of four congregations involved in the controversial "Magdalen laundries". A spokesperson for the congregation said, "It is with sorrow and sadness that we recognise that for many of those who spoke to the inquiry that their time in a refuge is associated with anxiety, distress, loneliness, isolation, pain and confusion and much more." "State facilitated 26% of admissions to Magdalene Laundries", RTE news, 6 February 2013
In France they had seventeen houses: one each at Caen, Saint-Brieuc, Rennes, La Rochelle, Paris, Versailles, Nantes, Lyon, Valence, Toulouse, Le Mans, Blois, Montauban, Besançon, Valognes, and two at Marseilles; in Italy, one at Loreto; and in Spain, one at Bilbao; and in Austria.
All the houses of this order are independent of each other, and each has its own novitiate, but the mother-house is still at Caen. The nuns wear a white habit and a large silver cross on the breast. To the three ordinary religious vows they add a fourth, viz., to devote themselves to the reformation of the fallen. The novitiate lasts two years.
In North America, they are located in: Hamburg & Newburgh, NY; Erie & Pittsburgh, PA; Wheeling, WV; & El Paso, TX; Carrollton, OH; Green Bay, WI; San Diego, CA; and Mexico & Canada.

==Apostolate==

Their primary apostolate is to work with "women in need." Ministries include: counseling, serving in parishes, counseling troubled teenage girls, day care for children and adults, rehabilitation and nursing care for the ill and elderly, people with AIDS, teaching in schools and religious education programs.

==Fusion with the Sisters of the Good Shepherd==

In 2013, the Sisters of the Union of Our Lady of Charity attended a General Chapter in which they voted for their fusion with the Sisters of the Good Shepherd.
In 2014, the Order of Our Lady of Charity founded by Saint John Eudes was formaly fusioned with the Congregation of Our Lady of Charity of the Good Shepherd founded by Saint Mary Euphrasia Pelletier.NEWS: Good Shepherd Sisters Congregational Leadership Team and Our Lady of Charity Central Leadership Team - Rome, 9 January 2014Good Shepherd Sisters and OLC Sisters: our new logo for this transition time - Rome, 13 February 2014

==References==

==External links==


