[[Pope Leo VI]]

CATEGORIES: Popes, Italian popes, 10th-century archbishops, Year of birth missing, 920s deaths, People of medieval Rome, 10th-century Italian people

Pope Leo VI (died February 929) was Pope for just over seven months, from June 928 to his death in February 929. His pontificate occurred during the period known as the Saeculum obscurum.

==Biography==

Leo VI was born into Roman family, and his father was Christophorus, who had been Primicerius under Pope John VIII around the year 876. Tradition has it that he was a member of the Sanguini family.Georgina Masson, The Companion Guide to Rome (1980), pg. 177 Just immediately prior to his election as pope, Leo had been serving as the Cardinal-Priest of the church of Santa Susanna.Mann, pg. 188
Leo was elected pope around June 928, during a period of anarchy. He was chosen by the senatrix Marozia, who had gained control of Rome via the domination of her husband Guy, Margrave of Tuscany, and who had ordered the imprisonment and death of Leo’s predecessor, Pope John X.Mann, pgs. 163-164
During his brief pontificate, Leo confirmed the decisions of the Synod of Split. He completed his predecessor’s investigations into the ecclesiastical situation in Dalmatia, and proceeded to give the pallium to John, Archbishop of Salona, and ordered all the bishops of Dalmatia to obey him. He also ordered the Bishop of Nona and others to limit themselves to the extent of their dioceses.Mann, pg. 168 Leo then issued a ban on castrati entering into a union of marriage.Medical problems of performing artists, Volume 13 (1998), pg. 151 He also issued an appeal for help against the Arab raiders who were threatening Rome, stating that:
 ”Whoever died faithful in this struggle will not see himself refused entry into the heavenly kingdom.”Pierre Riché, The Carolingians: A Family Who Forged Europe (1993), pg. 311 
The French chronicler Flodoard said of him:
 ”Through the virtue of Peter, Leo the sixth was taken and received, he was preserved for seven months and five days, and like his predecessors, he joined the company of the prophets.”  
Leo died in February 929, and was succeeded by Pope Stephen VII. He was buried at St. Peter’s Basilica.

==References==

==External links==


