[[Elberon, New Jersey]]

CATEGORIES: Assassination of James A. Garfield, Jersey Shore communities in Monmouth County, Long Branch, New Jersey, Unincorporated communities in Monmouth County, New Jersey

Elberon is an unincorporated community that is part of Long Branch in Monmouth County, New Jersey, United States. The area is served as United States Postal Service ZIP code 07740.
As of the 2000 United States Census, the population for ZIP Code Tabulation Area 07740 was 31,671.
The Elberon railroad station offers New Jersey Transit train service along the North Jersey Coast Line. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1978 (Reference #78001777).  The original station burned down and was removed from the Register in 1990.New Jersey and National Registers of Historic Places: Monmouth County, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Historic Preservation Office. Accessed June 7, 2012.
thumb|Long Branch BeachElberon was a beach resort community in the late 18th century. In the 19th century it was a "Hollywood" of the east, where some of the greatest theatrical and other performers of the day gathered and performed. It was visited by presidents Chester A. Arthur, James Garfield, Ulysses S. Grant, Benjamin Harrison, Rutherford Hayes,  William McKinley, and Woodrow Wilson.(2006) The Year in Review, The Long Branch Historical Association, Page 1. Seven Presidents Park, a park near the beach, is named in honor of their visits. 
The Church of the Presidents, where all seven worshiped, is the only structure left in Long Branch associated with them. The church was built in 1879, designed by New York architects William Appleton Potter and Robert Henderson Robertson.
President James A. Garfield was brought to Long Branch in the hope that the fresh air and quiet in Elberon might aid his recovery after being shot on July 2, 1881, an incident that left the assassin's bullet lodged in his spine. He died here on September 19, 1881, exactly two months before his 50th birthday.Sharkey, Joe. "The Great Boardwalk Towns of Jersey", The New York Times, August 4, 1991. Accessed July 10, 2007. "Along the 125-mile stretch of Jersey seashore, the northernmost of the Great Boardwalk Towns is Asbury Park, a resort that developed in the late 1800s as an alternative to its then vice-ridden neighbor, Long Branch, the town where President James Garfield died from gunshot wounds and thus became the first, but by no means only, local habitue to be dispatched at the hand of a disappointed office seeker." The Garfield Tea House, built from railroad ties that carried Garfield's train, is in Elberon.

==Notable people==

Notable current and former residents of Elberon include:

==References==

==External links==


