[[St. Hubert Catholic High School for Girls]]

CATEGORIES: Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Philadelphia, Girls' schools in Pennsylvania, Roman Catholic secondary schools in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Educational institutions established in 1941, 1941 establishments in Pennsylvania, Northeast Philadelphia

St. Hubert Catholic High School for Girls is a private, independent Roman Catholic preparatory school for girls located in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. With over 1,000 students, it is the largest all-girls school in Philadelphia. The school is named after St. Hubert, the patron saint of hunters. The school is under direction of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Philadelphia.

==History==

Discovered by the Germans in 1904, the grounds of the present day school was originally home to a Catholic parish which was built in 1924 for German speaking immigrants. On September 8, 1941, the high school was officially opened. At the time of its opening, the student body numbered 631, with 20 sisters serving in the faculty. Since 1941, over 21,000 students have graduated from St. Hubert. St. Hubert is the largest all-girls school in the Archdiocese in Philadelphia. The mascot is a deer named Bambi.  The Archdiocese of Philadelphia announced on January 6, 2012 that the school would close in June 2012 due to declining enrollment; a final decision on February 24, 2012 reversed that decision.

==Athletics==

The high school is home to the largest female athletic program in Philadelphia, with four intramural sports teams and 14 varsity teams. The four intramural sports include flag football, basketball, dodge ball, and indoor soccer. Girls can make teams with their friends and play these sports for fun without competing against other schools. The 14 varsity sports at St. Hubert Catholic High School for Girls include cross country, field hockey, soccer, tennis, volleyball, golf, basketball, bowling, cheerleading, indoor track and field, swimming, outdoor track and field, softball, and lacrosse. St. Hubert also has experienced many athletic accomplishments and has won some championships over the years, including tennis, bowling, and soccer. St. Hubert was the first high school to have a women's golf team. To help sponsor the athletics and make sure they run smoothly, there is an Athletic Association that oversees the athletic related events.

==Extra-Curricular activities==

St. Hubert offers its students over 40 clubs in which to participate. Among the most popular are: 
Academic clubs
Arts & Culture clubs
(some of which perform at the end of the academic year)
Cause-related clubs
SAAD (Students Against Destructive Decisions)
Non-competitive clubs
 
There is a Student Council, which is an excellent study body that plans many events throughout the year and helps the school run smoothly. The Bambie Ambassadors serve as representatives to the school and everything for which it stands.  
St. Hubert also has the distinction of having the largest orchestra in Northeast Philadelphia; the school's ensemble composed of most instruments in an orchestra.  
Tally-Ho is the school's newspaper; Calling Echo, the school's yearbook.

==Alma mater==

With proud and eager loyalty 
We fling our banner to the world 
And catch the rays of wisdom streaming down 
As its glory is unfurled.
We poise our spear, we aim it true 
With strength that's born of right. 
Let baseness and oppression feel 
The piercing of its might.
For St. Hubert's Brown and Gold 
For our faith that's firm and bold 
With joy we pledge our strength and zeal 
To uphold our treasured seal.
Armed with knowledge and with truth 
And the fire and courage of youth 
We dare to do, to live for you... 
Our Alma Mater true, our Alma Mater True.

==Notes and references==

==External links==


