[[Context-free grammar]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 in computer science, Compiler construction, Formal languages, Programming language topics, Wikipedia articles with ASCII art

In formal language theory, a context-free grammar (CFG)
is a formal grammar in which every production rule is of the form
where V is a single nonterminal symbol, and w is a string of terminals and/or nonterminals (w can be empty). A formal grammar is considered "context free" when its production rules can be applied regardless of the context of a nonterminal. It does not matter which symbols the nonterminal is surrounded by, the single nonterminal on the left hand side can always be replaced by the right hand side.
Languages generated by context-free grammars are known as context-free languages (CFL). Different Context Free grammars can generate the same context free language. It is important to distinguish properties of the language (intrinsic properties) from properties of a particular grammar (extrinsic properties). Given two context free grammars, the language equality question (do they generate the same language?) is undecidable.
Context-free grammars are important in linguistics for describing the structure of sentences and words in natural language, and in computer science for describing the structure of programming languages and other formal languages.
In linguistics, some authors use the term phrase structure grammar to refer to context-free grammars, whereby phrase structure grammars are distinct from dependency grammars. In computer science, a popular notation for context-free grammars is Backus–Naur Form, or BNF.

==Background==

Since the time of Pāṇini, at least, linguists have described the grammars of languages in terms of their block structure, and described how sentences are recursively built up from smaller phrases, and eventually individual words or word elements. An essential property of these block structures is that logical units never overlap. For example, the sentence:
can be logically parenthesized as follows:
A context-free grammar provides a simple and mathematically precise mechanism for describing the methods by which phrases in some natural language are built from smaller blocks, capturing the "block structure" of sentences in a natural way. Its simplicity makes the formalism amenable to rigorous mathematical study. Important features of natural language syntax such as agreement and reference are not part of the context-free grammar, but the basic recursive structure of sentences, the way in which clauses nest inside other clauses, and the way in which lists of adjectives and adverbs are swallowed by nouns and verbs, is described exactly.
The formalism of context-free grammars was developed in the mid-1950s by Noam Chomsky,[tpl]harvtxt|Hopcroft|Ullman|1979[/tpl], p. 106. and also their classification as a special type of formal grammar (which he called phrase-structure grammars).[ref]
