[[Probabilistic automaton]]

CATEGORIES: Automata theory, Probabilistic models

In mathematics and computer science, the probabilistic automaton (PA) is a generalization of the non-deterministic finite automaton; it includes the probability of a given transition into the transition function, turning it into a transition matrix or stochastic matrix. Thus, the probabilistic automaton generalizes the concept of a Markov chain or subshift of finite type. The languages recognized by probabilistic automata are called stochastic languages; these include the regular languages as a subset. The number of stochastic languages is uncountable.
The concept was introduced by Michael O. Rabin in 1963;M. O Rabin,"Probabilistic Automata", Information and Control 6 (1963) pp. 230–245 a certain special case is sometimes known as the Rabin automaton. In recent years, a variant has been formulated in terms of quantum probabilities, the quantum finite automaton.

==Definition==

For the ordinary non-deterministic finite automaton, one has
A state change from some state to any state must occur with probability one, of course, and so one must have
In particular, the state of a probabilistic automaton is always a stochastic vector, since the product of any two stochastic matrices is a stochastic matrix, and the product of a stochastic vector and a stochastic matrix is again a stochastic vector. This vector is sometimes called the distribution of states, emphasizing that it is a discrete probability distribution.

==Stochastic languages==

The set of languages recognized by probabilistic automata are called stochastic languages. They include the regular languages as a subset.

==Properties==

Every regular language is stochastic, and more strongly, every regular language is  η-stochastic. A weak converse is that every 0-stochastic language is regular; however, the general converse does not hold: there are stochastic languages that are not regular.
Every stochastic language is representable by a Rabin automaton.

==p-adic languages==

==Generalizations==

The probabilistic automaton has a geometric interpretation: the state vector can be understood to be a point that lives on the face of the standard simplex, opposite to the orthogonal corner. The transition matrices form a monoid, acting on the point.  This may be generalized by having the point be from some general topological space, while the transition matrices are chosen from a collection of operators acting on the topological space, thus forming a semiautomaton. When the cut-point is suitably generalized, one has a topological automaton. 
An example of such a generalization is the quantum finite automaton; here, the automaton state is represented by a point in complex projective space, while the transition matrices are a fixed set chosen from the unitary group. The cut-point is understood as a limit on the maximum value of the quantum angle.

==References==


