[[Etowah High School (Attalla, Alabama)]]

CATEGORIES: Public high schools in Alabama, Schools in Etowah County, Alabama, Educational institutions established in 1909, 1909 establishments in Alabama

Etowah High School is a public high school located in Attalla, Alabama that educates students in grades 9-12, and was founded in 1909.  Its mascot is the blue devil.  It is currently housed in the fourth building of the schools history. The current school is located on Case Ave, the former site of Alma Hinson Middle School. This school replaced Officer's Club Jr. High which was housed in the officer's club  on the Camp Sibert Army Base which was built during WW 11. The Old Building, Stone Building and New Building were located in Attalla on South 4th St. The Junior High School is located in the " New Building", the old and stone building being torn down.
Part of the changes at Etowah High include its change from being a combination county-city school system to a "city only" school.  This change effectively dropped the school's enrollment from over 1,000 in the mid and late 20th century.  The current enrollment after dropping to a point between 400 and 500 now numbers around 750.
The school is of course famous of many of its football athletes.  Other local alumni who either graduated from Etowah or attended it include:
Many more students have passed through the halls of Etowah High School, and many have gone on to become huge successes in their own rights.  Its commitment to education and leadership in the community is at the highest caliber. On a closing note, the school's page here is constantly re-edited by those who feel that only the football players who went on to college (and many more than are listed here did so) are the only ones who attended who are worth mentioning. Each time it is updated with other notable alumni, many believe that the same people come back in and re-edit the page to reflect only football players who have achieved success. While this is not fair to others who have gone on to great success themselves, we digress and now return your page to be re-edited, once again, and hope that many of you read it and see that it is not only football players who have achieved greatness from this school.

==Notable alumni==

==External links==


