[[Catherine Russell]]

CATEGORIES: English film actresses, English stage actresses, English television actresses, 1966 births, Living people, Alumni of the Central School of Speech and Drama

Catherine Russell (born 1966 in London) is a British stage, television and screen actress.

==Personal life==

Catherine Russell is the daughter of actor Nicholas Smith and his wife Mary. She is married to film producer Richard Holmes and they have two children, Sam and Poppy. She trained at the Central School of Speech and Drama from 1983 to 1986 under George Hall.

==Theatre==

Russell's credits are extensive and varied including being nominated for an Ian Charleson Award for her performance in Chekhov's Three Sisters. She has played leads in the West End at the National, the Royal Court, Soho Theatre, Chichester Festival Theatre, Lyric; Royal Exchange, Manchester and the Almeida Theatre.
She regularly works with the visionary director Max Stafford-Clark for his acclaimed theatre company Out of Joint where, as well as Masha in Three Sisters, she created roles such as Tess in Timberlake Wertenbaker's The Break of Day, Rima and Phoebe in Robin Soans' Talking to Terrorists, Mrs Peacham and Bett Rock in Stephen Jeffreys' The Convict's Opera and Hildy in Stella Feehily's Dreams of Violence. Other new work includes Nurse Ratched in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest directed by Michael Buffong, leading roles in Nobel Prize winner Derek Walcott's The Last Carnival and award winning Kevin Elyot's The Day I Stood Still directed by the renowned Ian Rickson. She is also a strong singer and played Rosie in the West End production of Mamma Mia!

==Television==

Russell has starred in several television series including playing Hugh Bonneville's sister, Rachel Cazalet, in The Cazalets, Gemma Jones' daughter in Chelworth, the title role of Elly Chandler in Chandler & Co with Barbara Flynn and subsequently Susan Fleetwood; Nathaniel Parker's wife in The Inspector Lynley Mysteries and Martin Shaw's wife in Always and Everyone. Other television includes guest appearances in Messiah, Poirot, Waking the Dead, Sherlock Holmes, Maigret, Silent Witness, Holding On and Pete versus Life (series one and two) with Rafe Spall. She has been playing surgeon, Serena Campbell, in the BBC medical drama Holby City since 1 May 2012.

==Film==

Russell starred opposite Ian Hart in the film Clockwork Mice directed by award winning director Vadim Jean. She also made a comic, cameo appearance playing a work colleague of Colin Firth's in Bridget Jones: The Edge of Reason. Her other films include Solitaire for Two and Soft Top Hard Shoulder.

==External links==


