[[Josh Berresford]]

CATEGORIES: American male television actors, American male film actors, American male stage actors, Robert Morris University alumni, 1978 births, Living people, People from Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania, American male models, Male actors from Pennsylvania, Spokespersons, Bartenders

Joshua Lee "Josh" Berresford (born July 11, 1978) is an American actor, model, and spokesperson.  Primarily known early in his career for his work on stage and in independent films, Berresford first gained national recognition for his role of Cory on the here! original series Dante's Cove.

==Biography==

Berresford was born and raised in Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania, a small town situated along the Beaver River, about thirty miles northwest of Pittsburgh, the only child of Becky and Robert Berresford. During his years at Blackhawk High School, Berresford served as vice-president of his sophomore and junior class and as treasurer of the National Honor Society. Berresford as Vice President of his class for Sophomore and Junior year of High School, Treasurer of the National Honor Society and played Tennis, Golf and Baseball and was known as the best pitcher in the Farm League.
Berresford attended Robert Morris University in Pittsburgh and graduated with a B.S.B.A. in Communication Management, focusing on television production, he worked a certain period as a waiter and Bartender in Ground Round restaurant in Pennsylvania. After taking summer conservatory classes at Point Park College in Pittsburgh, he auditioned for and won his first community theatre role in a play entitled Big Bucks.
He moved to New York City in 2003, continuing his studies at Caymichael Patten Studios and Sande Shurlin Studios and performing improv with the Upright Citizens Brigade.

===Career===

Berresford's theatre roles in Pittsburgh included productions of Psycho Beach Party, Do Black Patent Leather Shoes Really Reflect Up?, Torch Song Trilogy, The White Rose, How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying, A Bad Year for Tomatoes, The Man in the Dog Suit and Seven Brides for Seven Brothers. In New York City, he appeared in Off-Broadway productions of Forbidden Fruit, Test Tube World, Glass Highways, The Heat in Alphabet City, Last Day, The Wedding Reception, The Grand Guignols, Café Playa Moon, Edenville and Birdy's Bachelorette Party.
He has had leading and supporting roles in independent movies such as Missing Jane, Pieces of Johnny, Take Out, Unrestful, The Way I See Things and Aversion. On television he has appeared in Dante’s Cove and Kings.

==Filmography==

==External links==


