[[Endless Mic]]

CATEGORIES: Musical groups from Chapel Hill-Carrboro, North Carolina

Endless Mic is a Chapel Hill-based hip hop group composed of Zano, Stu!, and Deez. They have released one album, titled Cave Livin' on the small independent Trekky Records. They have performed the throughout the state of North Carolina and have performed with both RJD2 and One Be Lo. They have relocated to Greensboro and are finalizing their follow-up album, Baby Geniuses.

==Biography==

Endless Mic, as members of the blossoming underground scene in Chapel Hill, see hip hop as an art form and not a commercial. Zano and Stu! have spent the past four years carefully shaping their unique brand of immediate and clever hip-hop. Zano and Stu!'s undeniable lyrical chemistry is augmented by the innovative production of Durham native and Greensboro resident, Deez. The lyrical content spans from absurd tongue in cheek narratives to analysis of the current condition of the hip hop scene to deeply personal confessionals about love, loss, and the human condition. Endless Mic already had two self-released full-length albums under their belt, along with a loyal following across North Carolina, when they joined Chapel Hill based Trekky Records. They soon after relocated from Chapel Hill to Greensboro, where they now live. They released their Trekky debut, Cave Livin', in November 2005. After the release of Cave Livin', Deez became a full member of the group as Zano and Stu!'s full-time producer. Endless Mic released their second album on Trekky Records, entitled Baby Geniuses nationally on September 17, 2007.
Known for their high-energy, hard-partying live show, Endless Mic has made a name for themselves on the live music circuit, sharing the stage with a wide variety of acts such as RJD2, Akrobatik, Gov't Mule, One Be Lo, Yo Mama's Big Fat Booty Band, The Never, Will Hoge and Ryan Shaw.
After touring extensively in support of Baby Geniuses, Endless Mic returned to the studio to record their next project.  The All New Super Exclusive Al Gore Bongwater Club Mixtape Vol. 1 was released on April 16, 2009 as a free internet download.  The mixtape received positive reviews in local press outlets, but its content was criticized by some as being full of "cursing and a ton of sexual innuendo."Endless Mic's Endless Pursuit Nonetheless, the free mixtape was wildly popular amongst the internet crowd, with thousands of downloads and plays on the band's Myspace page.
The band took a hiatus following the short supporting tour of The All New Super Exclusive Al Gore Bongwater Club Mixtape Vol. 1 to finish college at The University of North Carolina at Greensboro.  Currently the group is working on a yet-to-be-titled studio album, slated for a late 2009 release.  deez and Stu! are finishing up their project, entitled Mr. Nobody.  The two have been very guarded of the details of the project, but a website and Myspace launch is expected at the end of May 2009.

==Discography==

==References==

==See also==


