[[Captains Courageous]]

CATEGORIES: 1897 novels, 19th-century British children's literature, British novels, British novels adapted into films, Novels by Rudyard Kipling, Novels first published in serial form, Novels set in North America, Works originally published in McClure's, Maritime books, Novels set in Newfoundland and Labrador

Captains Courageous is an 1897 novel, by Rudyard Kipling, that follows the adventures of fifteen-year-old Harvey Cheyne Jr., the spoiled son of a railroad tycoon, after he is saved from drowning by a fishing boat in the north Atlantic. The novel originally appeared as a serialisation in McClure's, beginning with the November 1896 edition.
The book's title comes from the ballad "Mary Ambree", which starts, "When captains courageous, whom death could not daunt". Kipling had previously used the same title for an article on businessmen as the new adventurers, published in The Times of 23 November 1892.Captains Courageous title, Kipling.org

==Plot==

Harvey Cheyne is the son of a wealthy railroad magnate and his wife, who are over-indulgent parents in San Diego, California. Washed overboard from a transatlantic steamship and rescued by fishermen off the Grand Banks of Newfoundland, the young Harvey Cheyne can neither persuade them to take him quickly to port, nor convince them of his wealth. Disko Troop, captain of the We're Here, offers him a job as part of the crew until they return to port. With no other choice, Harvey accepts.
Through a series of trials and adventures, the youth learns to adjust to his rough new life and, with the help of his friend, the captain's son Dan Troop, he makes progress. Eventually, the schooner returns to port and Harvey wires his parents. They rush cross-country by their private rail car, given priority over commercial traffic, to Boston, Massachusetts. From there they go to the fishing town of Gloucester to find that their son has matured to become an industrious, serious and considerate young man.
Harvey's mother rewards the seaman who initially rescued her son. Harvey's father rewards Captain Troop by hiring his son Dan to work on his prestigious tea clipper fleet. He is delighted at his son's new maturity and their relationship improves, and Harvey decides to begin his career with his father's shipping lines.

==Notes==

The book was written during Kipling's time living in Brattleboro, Vermont. Kipling credited his family doctor and personal friend there with helping him on the novel. Kipling recalled in his autobiography:
Kipling also recalled another who helped:
The resulting account, in Chapter 9, of the Cheynes' journey from San Diego to Boston is a classic of railway literature. The couple travel in the Cheynes' private rail car, the "Constance", are taken from San Diego to Chicago as a special train, hauled by sixteen locomotives in succession. It takes precedence over 177 other trains. "Two and one-half minutes would be allowed for changing engines; three for watering and two for coaling." The "Constance" is attached to the scheduled express "New York Limited" to Buffalo, New York and then transferred to the New York Central for the trip across the state to Albany. Switched to the Boston and Albany Railroad, the Cheynes complete the trip to Boston in their private car, with the entire cross-country run taking 87 hours 35 minutes. 
Kipling also recalled:
Disko Troop was said to be given his first name because he was born on board his father's ship when it was iced in near Disko Island on the west coast of Greenland. One of the sailors, Long Jack, sometimes calls him Discobolus.

==Film, TV, theatrical, or other adaptations==

Captains Courageous has been adapted for film three times:
Musical theatre:
Other adaptations:

==Derivative usages==

==References==

==External links==


