[[Jerry Wayne Wickam]]

CATEGORIES: 1942 births, 1968 deaths, American military personnel killed in the Vietnam War, United States Army Medal of Honor recipients, People from Rockford, Illinois, United States Army soldiers, Recipients of the Purple Heart medal, Vietnam War recipients of the Medal of Honor

Jerry Wayne Wickam (January 19, 1942 – January 6, 1968) was a United States Army soldier and a recipient of the United States military's highest decoration—the Medal of Honor—for his actions in the Vietnam War.

==Biography==

Wickam joined the Army from Chicago, Illinois in 1966, Service Profile and by January 6, 1968 was serving as a Corporal in Troop F of 2nd Squadron, 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment. On that day, near Loc Ninh in the Republic of Vietnam, Wickam single-handedly attacked several enemy bunkers before being fatally wounded.
Wickam, aged 25 at his death, was buried in Lightsville Cemetery, Leaf River, Illinois.

==Medal of Honor citation==

Corporal Wickam's official Medal of Honor citation reads:
 For conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity in action at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty. Cpl. Wickam, distinguished himself while serving with Troop F. Troop F was conducting a reconnaissance in force mission southwest of Loc Ninh when the lead element of the friendly force was subjected to a heavy barrage of rocket, automatic weapons, and small arms fire from a well concealed enemy bunker complex. Disregarding the intense fire, Cpl. Wickam leaped from his armored vehicle and assaulted one of the enemy bunkers and threw a grenade into it, killing 2 enemy soldiers. He moved into the bunker, and with the aid of another soldier, began to remove the body of one Viet Cong when he detected the sound of an enemy grenade being charged. Cpl. Wickam warned his comrade and physically pushed him away from the grenade thus protecting him from the force of the blast. When a second Viet Cong bunker was discovered, he ran through a hail of enemy fire to deliver deadly fire into the bunker, killing one enemy soldier. He also captured 1 Viet Cong who later provided valuable information on enemy activity in the Loc Ninh area. After the patrol withdrew and an air strike was conducted, Cpl. Wickam led his men back to evaluate the success of the strike. They were immediately attacked again by enemy fire. Without hesitation, he charged the bunker from which the fire was being directed, enabling the remainder of his men to seek cover. He threw a grenade inside of the enemy's position killing 2 Viet Cong and destroying the bunker. Moments later he was mortally wounded by enemy fire. Cpl. Wickam's extraordinary heroism at the cost of his life were in keeping with the highest traditions of the military service and reflect great credit upon himself and the U.S. Army. 

==See also==

==References==

