</ref> before he was finally appointed to fill the vacancy left with the retirement of [[Romeo J. Callejo, Sr.]]. 
Two retired justices had warned against Reyes’ appointment, since he had exceeded the age limit. Reyes was due to retire on January 2009, when he reached the age of 70. Under the rules of the Judicial and Bar Council, only those career officials who are able to serve for at least one and a half years will be considered.Inquirer.net, New SC justice: I don’t know Ms Arroyo’s brother Meanwhile, the High Tribunal asked Reyes to comment on the allegations of corruption in Cebu CA substations during his time in the CA that were raised by a Manila-based newspaper columnist, a litigant who lost a civil case, and an anti-crime crusader in the Visayas. The Court of Appeals stations in the Visayas and Mindanao are facing possible reorganization or temporary transfer to Manila in the wake of allegations of corruption in the Cebu judiciary that has worried the Supreme Court. These options were recommended by  Reyes.Inquirer.net, Fate of appeals court stations to be discussed next week
Reyes retired from the Court in January 2009 upon reaching the mandatory retirement age of 70.
On August 14, 2009, Reyes was found guilty by the Supreme Court of leaking a draft decision that he had penned in the election disqualification case against Negros Oriental Rep. Jocelyn Limkaichong. Because of his culpability he was indefinitely barred from practicing law and perpetual disqualification from holding government position.

==Filipino in Court proceedings==

On August 30, 2007, Reyes urged judges, lawyers and court officials to follow the example set by 3 Bulacan court salas (Branches 6, 80 and 81) using Filipino in proceedings (at the program commemorating the 157th birth anniversary of Marcelo H. del Pilar at the Bulacan State University. Reyes noted that the use of Filipino in Del Pilar’s Diariong Tagalog played a major role in enlightening Filipinos about the oppression during the Spanish regime.Inquirer.net, Courts urged to use Filipino in proceedings

==NBN controversy==

On September 28, 2007, Ruben Reyes clarified that he is not the "Ruben Reyes" mentioned in the network (NBN) deal scandal (the "businessman" and "golfing buddy" of Commission on Elections (Comelec) chairman Benjamin Abalos). Reyes stated: "The guy must be one of several namesakes but to erase all doubts in mind of the public, let it be put on record that I categorically deny any relation to the 'Ruben Reyes' linked to the NBN-ZTE controversy.” Inquirer.net, Newest SC justice: ‘I’m not NBN’s Ruben Reyes’

==Notable Decisions==

1. Cosmos v. Nagrama

2. People v. Glino

3. Gordon vs. PayumoPhilippine Panorama, Sunday, January 21, 2001, page 10.

4. A.M. No. 07-09-13-SC: "In re - the column ‘Business Circuit,’ of Amado Macasaet in the September 18, 19, 20, and 21, 2007 issues of Malaya," Indirect Contempt, 49 pages-judgment.abs-cbnnews.com,  SC cites Malaya publisher guilty of contempt, imposes finenewsinfo.inquirer.net, SC cites newspaper publisher for indirect contemptsupremecourt.gov.ph, A.M. No. 07-09-13-SC
5. G.R. No. 167707 and G.R. No. 173775, The Secretary of DENR vs. Mayor Jose Yap, Dr. Orlando Sacay vs. The Secretary of DENR, October 8, 2008

==Notes==


