[[Anita Kunz]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, Living people, Canadian illustrators, Canadian women artists, Officers of the Order of Canada

Anita E. Kunz, OC (born 1956) is a Canadian-born artist and illustrator.
Kunz has lived in London, New York and Toronto, contributing to magazines and working for design firms, book publishers and advertising agencies in Germany, Japan, Sweden, Norway, Canada, South Africa,  Holland, Portugal, France and England. Her clients include Time magazine, Rolling Stone, Vanity Fair, The New Yorker, GQ, The New York Times, Sony Music, Random House Publishing and many others. From 1988 to 1990 she was one of two artists chosen by Rolling Stone magazine to produce a monthly illustrated History of Rock 'n Roll end paper. She has produced cover art for many magazines including Rolling Stone, The New Yorker, Sports Illustrated, Time Magazine, Newsweek Magazine, the Atlantic Monthly and The New York Times Magazine. She has also illustrated more than fifty book jacket covers.
Anita frequently teaches workshops and lectures at universities and institutions internationally including the Smithsonian Institution and the Corcoran College of Art and Design in Washington DC. Her summer workshops have been conducted at the Illustration Academy in Kansas City, and at the Masters of Art degree program at Syracuse University. She has been honored with many prestigious awards and medals and her critically acclaimed paintings and sculptures have appeared in galleries world wide, including the Norman Rockwell Museum in Massachusetts and the Teatrio Cultural Association in Rome, Italy. Her works are in the permanent collections at the Library of Congress, the Archives of Canada in Ottawa, the Musèe Militaire de France in Paris, the Museum of Contemporary Art in Rome, and a number of her Time Magazine cover paintings are in the permanent collection at the National Portrait Gallery in Washington DC.  In 1987 she showed a collection of her works at Canada House in Trafalgar Square, London. In 1997 she had a one woman show at the Foreign Press office in New York City; in 1998 she had a solo show at the Creation Gallery in Tokyo; and the Society of Illustrators Museum of American Illustration mounted a mid-career retrospective of her work in the fall of 2000. In the fall of 2003 she was the first woman and the first Canadian to have a solo show  at the Library of Congress in Washington DC. In 2000 she was invited to speak as one of The New Yorker magazine cover artists at the annual New Yorker Festival in New York  and in 2001,2004 and again in 2009, she was invited to speak at ideaCity, a think tank of luminaries from the fields of medicine, politics, science and the arts in Toronto.  From 2000 to 2003 she served on the Board of Directors of the Illustration conference. In 2004 she  served as chair for the Society of Illustrators Museum of American Illustration annual exhibit and she has also served as chair of the Museum Committee there. In 1997 she received the Les Usherwood Lifetime Achievement Award from the Advertising and Design Club of Canada. In 2007 she gave a short talk at the prestigious TED conference in Californina about her New Yorker magazine covers. Anita has been named one of the fifty most influential women in Canada by the National Post newspaper. 
Articles about her work have appeared in Graphis and Novumgebrauchsgrafik magazines (Switzerland), Communication Arts and Step by Step magazine (USA), Idea, Illustration and Creation magazines (Japan), Applied Arts (Canada), Nuvo (Canada) and The Design Journal (Korea) and many other publications.
Her work is represented by Gallery House gallery in Toronto.
In 2009, she was made an Officer of the Order of Canada "for her contributions as an illustrator whose insightful works have graced publications around the world".[tpl]cite web|url=http://www.gg.ca/media/doc.asp?lang=e&DocID=5815|title=Governor General announces 60 new appointments to the Order of Canada|date=July 1, 2009[/tpl]
In 2010 she received an Honorary Doctorate from her alma mater The Ontario College of Art and Design University.
In 2012 she was a recipient of the Queen's Diamond Jubilee medal of honour.

==References==

==External links==


