[[Hebrew Academy of Nassau County]]

CATEGORIES: Modern Orthodox Jewish day schools in the United States, Educational institutions established in 1953, Schools in Nassau County, New York, Jewish day schools in New York, Private high schools in New York, Private middle schools in New York, Private elementary schools in New York, Jews and Judaism in Nassau County, New York, 1953 establishments in New York

Hebrew Academy of Nassau County (HANC) is a K-12, comprehensive, modern-orthodox, Jewish high school, located in Nassau County, New York.

==History==

In 1953, Nassau County was virtually empty of Jewish education. Through the dedicated efforts of Rabbi Meyer and Goldie Fendel and a small group of individuals, the vision to establish a Hebrew day school on Long Island was conceived. These HANC “founders” — individuals with a strong desire to build an educational institution — came together in unity to offer their expertise, their skills, their funds, and their unconditional love to build the Hebrew Academy of Nassau County .
With an initial enrollment of just thirty students, in a small building, the seeds were planted. Indeed, these seeds have blossomed during HANC’s illustrious fifty year history, through the assistance and guidance of a united, caring community. Today, HANC’s four campuses, two in West Hempstead, one in Plainview and one in Uniondale, serve more than twelve hundred students, from nursery through high school, who come from fifty communities throughout Long Island and Queens.
The Hebrew Academy of Nassau County is a co-educational, orthodox, yeshiva day school that has become a renowned institution — providing students from a variety of backgrounds and degrees of observance with the opportunity to reach their highest potential, in accordance to their level of understanding and ability.
That HANC continues to be a vital part of the lives of thousands of students and their families is because HANC’s mission has remained true to maintaining an educational program of the highest caliber in both Judaic and general studies — one that produces educated, knowledgeable and upright Jewish young men and women, loyal to the ideals of Torah and the spirit of American democracy. Equally important, and a major component of the education that our students receive, is respect and concern for all human beings, humility, the giving of charity, and the importance of acts of kindness. These are all major factors in the educational, moral, and spiritual development that is imbued in each very special HANC student.   http://hanc.org/about-hanc/history-milestones/

==Notable graduates==

==References==

==External links==


