[[Soundcheck (radio program)]]

CATEGORIES: American music radio programs, American public radio programs

Soundcheck is a talk radio program about music and the arts hosted by John Schaefer. It is produced by WNYC, New York Public Radio. From 2002 to 2012, the show aired at 2 p.m. EST on 93.9 FM in New York City and on XM Satellite Radio Channel 133."WNYC.org", ''WNYC's Web site. The show underwent a summer hiatus from the airwaves in May 2012, and returned in September of that year.

==About Soundcheck==

Soundcheck covers music of all genres and styles and features interviews with performers, composers, authors and critics as well as frequent call-in segments. The show covers the latest music industry news, trends and ideas and is notable for its frequent in-studio performance segments. Guests have included singer-songwriters such as Norah Jones, M. Ward and Suzanne Vega; rock and pop musicians such as Robert Plant, David Byrne, and Moby; classical artists like cellist Yo-Yo Ma and violinist Anne-Sophie Mutter; world music performers like Ladysmith Black Mambazo and Youssou N'Dour; and jazz artists such as Wynton Marsalis and Ornette Coleman. Call-in segments regularly cover such subjects as rock 'n' roll history, personal technology, pop culture, online music distribution, arts philanthropy, new music, classical music, and audience trends. The show has also presented remote broadcasts from music venues around New York City and from Tanglewood in Massachusetts. On April 8, 2007, Soundcheck marked its five-year anniversary."DJs Without Borders", ''by Justin Davidson.
Soundcheck′s senior producer is Joel Meyer, its associate producer is Katie Bishop and its assistant producer is Gretta Cohn. The show's technical director is Irene Trudel.

==About John Schaefer==

In addition to hosting Soundcheck, John Schaefer has also hosted and produced WNYC's new-music program New Sounds since 1982. Since 1986, he has produced and hosted New Sounds Live, an annual series of live broadcast concerts devoted to many types of new and unusual forms of music. Since 1991 he has produced and hosted WNYC's programs of classical performances, both in studio and in various concert halls."WNYC Web site", ''Staff bios.

==External links==

Soundcheck Workshop  
Official Web site 
MySpace page 

==Notes==


