[[Carol Miller]]

CATEGORIES: American sculptors, 1933 births, Living people, American women poets, American journalists

Carol Miller (born November 1933, Los Angeles, California[tpl]cite linked authority file |id=n91-28390[/tpl]) is an American author and sculptor with over 60 years of residence in Mexico. She has been a sculptor for nearly 50 years, with some 200 exhibits (group, individual, auctions) to her credit. She has been a writer all her life.
Her career in professional journalism began at age fifteen and continued in Mexico where she wrote for Mexican Life, Welcome, Mexito This Month, Revista de América, Mañana, Revista Tiempo, among others.  A correspondent for LIFE Magazine in Mexico (1962–65), syndicated travel writer featuring Mexico for Mexicana Airlines (subsidiary at the time of Pan American Airways), bilingual translator, scholar researching especially the Maya among other ancient cultures, film and art critic, also a consultant on dyslexia among other learning disabilities, as well as a magazine editor, lecturer, photographer, gastronome.  In addition she has also worked for ad agencies, public relations firms, craft centers and archaeological projects. In 1960 she launched the celebrated craft market known as the Bazaar Sabado.  She has produced close to 30 books, a number of them published in both English and Spanish, which have evolved out of her extensive research and travel, first among Maya sites in Mexico, Guatemala, Belize, Honduras and El Salvador, and then distant, often related, cultures around the world, with a special focus on archaeology and history.  Her articles on the Greek world in the Sunday Travel Section of the now-defunct Mexico City News, published during the 70’s and 80’s,  earned her the title of Honorary Cultural Attaché for the Greek Embassy in Mexico, and the nickname of “Athenea”.200 Mexicanos que nos Heredó el Mundo, published by the Centro de estudios migratorios. Editor: Paralelo. ISBN 978-607-7891-02-4
 "Alma de mi alma, el México de los extranjeros", published in 2011, was co-edited by the Instituto Nacional de Migración (México). and the  Instituto Nacional de Anthropología e Historia (INAH).
Her career in the arts, and particularly as a sculptor, won her the “Superior Academic Order” from the Accademio Internazionale Greci-Marino in Vinzaglio, Italy.  In 2004 this order was raised to “Honorary National Councilor for Mexico” in recognition of her overall contribution to the arts, specifically in sculpture and letters.  She is a member of the Society for American Archaeology (SAA) where she has served as a perennial member of the Media Relations Committee; and is a research consultant at the Institute for Maya Studies in Mexico.  She serves on the Advisory Board of Exploring Solutions Past (ESP): The Maya Forest Alliance, with the El Pilar Archaeological Reserve for Maya Flora and Fauna in Belize.   A resident of Mexico for over 60 years, she lives with her husband, designer and art restorer Tomás González, in Mexico City.  She has two children, Fausto and Dushka Zapata.

==Books by Carol Miller==

==References==


