[[Anthony Gifford, 6th Baron Gifford]]

CATEGORIES: 1940 births, People educated at Winchester College, Alumni of King's College, Cambridge, British barristers, Living people, Queen's Counsel 1901–2000, Reparations for slavery, Barons in the Peerage of the United Kingdom

Anthony Maurice Gifford, 6th Baron Gifford, QC (born 1 May 1940) is a British hereditary peer and senior barrister. He inherited the title of 6th Lord Gifford on the death of his father, the 5th Lord Gifford, in April 1961.thePeerage.com - Person Page 7943 

==Biography==

Lord Gifford was educated at Winchester College and Kings College Cambridge, was called to the Bar in 1962 and took silk in 1983.GIFFORD, Lord Anthony Maurice QC. Havers.
He was a co-founder of the North Kensington Neighbourhood Law Centre, Britain’s first law centre. He founded Wellington Street Chambers and was its head for 15 years. He joined 8 King’s Bench Walk in 1989 and has been head of Chambers since 2001. In 2006 his chambers relocated to 1 Mitre Court Buildings.1 Mitre Court Buildings.
He was Counsel for Paul Hill in the Guildford Four appeals and for Gerry Hunter in the Birmingham Six Appeals. 
He was chairman of the Broadwater Farm Inquiry and the Liverpool Eight Inquiry, both of which investigated patterns of alleged racism and discrimination. He represented the family of James Wray at the Bloody Sunday Inquiry. 
Cases in which he has been engaged include appeals involving trade unions, libel, contract and tort as well as criminal law.
In 1991, set up a firm of attorneys in Kingston, Jamaica, where he practises in civil and criminal law. He divides his practice between Jamaica and the UK.

==Reparations campaign==

Gifford has campaigned in favour of Reparations for slavery."The legal basis of the claim for Reparations". A paper presented to the First Pan-African Congress on Reparations, Abuja, Federal Republic of Nigeria, 27-29 April 1993. He is a member of the Jamaican reparations commission and has said of the reparations issue: "I would like to see it approached on a Caribbean-wide basis."David McFadden, "Jamaica revives slavery reparations commission", The Guardian, 1 November 2012.

==Publications==

==References==


