[[Society of Knights of the Round Table]]

CATEGORIES: Dining clubs

The Honourable Society of Knights of the Round Table, also known as The Knights of the Round Table Club, is a British society which exists to perpetuate the name and fame of King Arthur and the ideals for which he stood. It meets at Lansdowne House, Berkeley Square, home of the Lansdowne Club.

==History==

The society was formed at the Fountain Coffee House in 1720, the site of the former Savoy Palace on London's Strand. Its membership was drawn from authors, actors, artists, and their patrons.  Famous members included David Garrick, who was a member from 1761 to 1776, and Charles Dickens.

==Statutes of the Society==

As set out in a booklet of 1946:
(a) The perpetuation of the Name and Fame of Arthur,
King of Britain, and the Ideals for which he stood.
(b) The promotion of Knightly good-fellowship.
(c) The cultivation of better International understanding,
based on practical lines.
N.B.—To ensure that the object at (a) is carried out in the
true spirit, a Knight, well versed in the history of the immortal King Arthur, shall be charged with the duty of
proposing the Toast of " King Arthur," and of recounting
the exploits and good works of that Monarch, at every
meeting of The Knights of the Round Table. This Toast
shall follow immediately after the Toasts of the Reigning
Sovereign and the Members of His Royal House. The
Knight responsible for it will be known as " King Arthur's
Champion," and so described in all records.
The Knight President ;
The Deputy Knights President ;
Senior Knight Vice-President ;
Knights Vice-president ;
and all Knights Councillor who held that title on the 1st May,
1946.
An additional number, not exceeding ten, may be elected
from time to time. The election of these additional Councillors
shall be for a term of three years, such term to date as from the
1st January following such appointment.
Retiring members shall be eligible for re-election. Election
to the Council shall be either in recognition of work done for or
on behalf of the Club and its ideals or to provide representatives
of the younger Knights with an opportunity to express their
opinions, and to qualify them to take an active part in the administration of the Club as members of the Executive Committee.
The Council shall be responsible for the election of new
members and for the re-election of retiring members of the
Council. When doing so they shall give careful consideration to
any recommendations by individual Knights, who must send
such recommendations in writing to the Knight Remembrancer.
Except for the election of Knights to the Advisory Council,
that body will have no executive duties but shall be consulted
by the Executive Committee on such matters as the appointment
of a new Knight President, suggestions for alteration of the
Statutes, and on any other matter affecting the welfare of the
Club on which the Executive Committee desire their guidance.
A Meeting of the Advisory Council shall be held during the
four weeks preceding the Annual General Meeting. Nine shall
form a quorum.
The Administration and Organisation of the Club shall be
in the hands of an Executive Committee consisting of the following
members ex officio :—
Knight President ;
Deputy Knights President ;
Senior Knight Vice-Prcsident ;
Knight Remembrancer ;
Knight Treasurer ;
together with five Knight Councillors selected by the above
ex officio members.
Elections shall be for a term of three years, dating from 1st
January next following such appointments. Retiring members
shall be eligible for re-election. Three shall form a quorum.
Any matter not dealt with by the Statutes shall be decided
by the Executive Committee.

==Knight President==

The current Knight President of the Society is 
Admiral The Lord West of Spithead GCB DSC.  The society's chapel is the church of St Martin within Ludgate.

===Former Vice-president===

Robert Baden-Powell, 1st Baron Baden-Powell was a vice-president of the society.

==External links==


