[[Edgardo Rodríguez Juliá]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, Living people, Puerto Rican writers, Guggenheim Fellows

Edgardo Rodríguez Juliá was born in 1946 in Rio Piedras. He spent his childhood in Aguas Buenas, amid the bourgeois media, in a rural setting. He went to the city, by the 65th Infantry ... what he termed as "diabolical border" of the fifties. 
All his childhood and adolescence is in memory, to bring into his writing, he admits that there is always political commentary, while not a writer independence. Want to watch with a deep sense of justice and what is its people, wants to offer his version of what has been and Puerto Rico. 
It starts as a writer in 1973, when you get the third prize in the annual competition of the Puerto Rican Athenaeum stories. Generation arises during the seventies when giving birth to his first novel The resignation of hero Baltasar 1974. In this novel we find elements of different nature: magical realism, myth, exaggeration, truculence, mystery extravaganza, to unwrap the thread of the plot, presentation pathways diverse literary quotations of certain works and diaries, letters, conferences, official chronicles , anonymous news, papers of the Inquisition, comments compendiosos of certain passages of the story, each, cover a different view of their own lined prose style. Another aspect, which runs in his first novel, is the expression of deep root imaginative and extravagant feverish glare that is used in the exposure of Baltasar dreamlike fantasies. 
His real reason for being is focused on her work, which flange deep joy of creating a work that has its own personality and a clear design. By now, he says, is ripe to write, knows the history of his work, what it wants to achieve, but argues that at his age, they start to run low energies. His attraction, the only, and read voraciously and swim every day, has been writing. He met his calling very early in the seventeen years, when he wrote prose poems and stories then very ill, never dared to publish. 
Studied Humanities with a concentration in Hispanic Studies, and made the Masters in Madrid in Program New York University. Never finished his doctorate and appears to have ruled out the idea. At present, and for many years a professor of literature at the College of General Studies at the University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras.

==Bibliography==

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


