[[Hancock House (Lower Alloways Creek Township, New Jersey)]]

CATEGORIES: Houses on the National Register of Historic Places in New Jersey, Houses completed in 1734, Houses in Salem County, New Jersey, New Jersey in the American Revolution, Museums in Salem County, New Jersey, Historic house museums in New Jersey, National Register of Historic Places in Salem County, New Jersey

The Hancock House is a historic structure in the Hancock's Bridge section of Lower Alloways Creek Township, Salem County, New Jersey, United States. It was the site of the 1778 Hancock's Bridge massacre.NJDEP-Parks and Forests-Centennial of NJ State Historic Site The site is on the National Register of Historic Places.

==History==

Built in 1734 for Judge William and Sarah Hancock, the house features a blue glazed brick pattern, which gives the year of construction, 1734, and the initials of the couple for whom it was built, 'W S' for William and Sarah. William died in 1762, and passed the house to his son William, also a judge.

==Massacre==

Loyalist Approximately 300 British troops Regiment and Queens Rangers (local Tories), led by Major John Graves Simcoe's,Battle of Quinton and Alloway Creek Bridges and frustrated by rebel resistance in around Salem and nearby Cumberland County, crossed Alloway Creek in the early morning of March 21, 1778 after a several hour guided (Tory) local marsh trek, which was an additional flanking maneuver to complete the surrounding of the Hancock House Hancock. At approximately 5 a.m. that chilly morning, the troops and Rangers entered the house and surprised 20 to 30 members of the local militia stationed there, along with Judge Hancock a loyalist who was thought to be away for the night but fatefully was home sleeping. Eight American men were killed during the melee (4-5 home occupants (family/militia) were bayonetted to death by local Tories, including the honorable Judge Hancock who had 10 stab wounds and died the next day), the rest were wounded at the scene or during a retreat, or captured as prisoners.
From the attic window of their home in Elsinboro, diagonally across the creek from the Hancock House, William Abbott and his son Samuel witnessed in the dawning morning light, the British and Tory soldiers pursuing and killing the few American militiamen who had escaped the scene of the carnage at the house and surrounding yard.  The next morning while driving to a meeting in Salem, several British and Tory troops surrounded the Abbott carriage and after tormenting the occupants by thrusting their bayonets at them, showed them blood on their steel weapons and exclaimed, "See the blood or your countrymen."
Other County Colonial lore states that in the midst of the massacre, the wife of one of the local militia, who in a short time expected to be a mother, was sleeping in the Hancock House. Awakened by the screams of the dying militia, she jumped from a second story window on the west side of the house and made good her escape. Tradition says that within twenty-four hours, the child was born and that descendants of that child are living in Lower Alloways Creek township today. The old Hancock House museum is said to still have actual massacre blood stains on its attic floor.

==See also==

==References==

4. "The History of Salem County New Jersey, Being the Story of John Fenwick's Colony, the Oldest English Speaking Settlement on the Delaware River", author Joseph, S. Sickler

==External links==


