[[QTS Skills Tests]]

CATEGORIES: Education in the United Kingdom, Teacher training

The QTS Skills Tests are two computer-based tests in literacy and numeracy which must be passed by anyone attempting to gain Qualified Teacher Status (QTS) in England in addition to successfully completing a teacher training course, such as a PGCE, a BEd, a BA or the GTP.[tpl]cite web|title=The Teaching Agency|url=http://www.education.gov.uk|publisher=HM Government (UK)|accessdate=9 March 2013[/tpl] (Prior to 2012, a third test - ICT - was also a requirement.)

==Booking and administration==

The tests are administered by a commercial organisation on behalf of the Teaching Agency. In order to sit the tests, candidates must register with a special number allocated to them by the Teaching Agency which is supplied to the candidate by their training provider, e.g. teacher-training college or university. Once registered with the Teaching Agency, booking is made on-line through the Teaching Agency website at any Pearson Vue test centre around the country, but spaces are limited and can become difficult to book as the training year progresses. Many centres are only open for a few halfdays during the week. Booking may be made up to three months in advance.
Both tests are conducted on computers in special rooms under the watchful eye of supervising staff. Casual working can be done on a mini whiteboard.
Both tests can be taken individually on separate days or on the same occasion (depending on time availability).

==Identification==

Every candidate must present two pieces of identification on each attendance. One must have a photograph, name and signature (e.g. passport), the other must have a name and signature. If you present these on one day but turn up the next day to take another test without them, you will be denied the chance to take the second test and will have to rebook.

==Practice materials and taking the tests==

Practice materials are available on the Teaching Agency website.  These are online tests which can be accessed from any internet enabled device. The literacy test is based on spelling, punctuation, and comprehension and lasts for no longer than 48 minutes. From March 2014 the punctuation section has been removed from the test for refinement by the Standards and Testing Agency; it is expected to be reintroduced in the autumn. The numeracy test starts off with a series of mental arithmetic questions, each with a strict time limit, though paper working is allowed. That is followed by a series of more complex questions involving interpretation of statistical data and graphs, computing costs of school trips and so on. For this section of the test an on-screen calculator is supplied. Candidates have up to 45 minutes for the whole test.

==Passing and failing==

The pass marks for the literacy and maths tests were increased to 63% in 2012. Candidates are now also restricted to 1 attempt and 2 resits in each of these tests, which must be completed before beginning teacher training. Resits incur a charge.

==Rest of the United Kingdom==

The QTS Skills Tests are only compulsory in England. Teachers training in Wales do not have to pass the tests, even though the rest of the requirements for Qualified Teacher Status are identical. Teachers in Scotland and Northern Ireland also do not have to pass the tests, though the requirements to become a qualified teacher are different from England and Wales.
Teachers wishing to teach in a different Home Nation to the one they trained in must apply to the relevant General Teaching Council to be allowed to teach there. With the exception of teachers trained on the GTP, this is normally a formality for teachers who have successfully completed their training. This has led to inconsistencies with regards to the QTS Skills Tests across the UK: as passing the QTS Skills Tests is a requirement of QTS in England, teachers who train in England who then go on to teach elsewhere in the UK must still pass the tests despite them not being a requirement in their destination nation; however, as England normally automatically recognises the equivalent of QTS from Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, teachers who train in these nations do not have to pass the QTS Skills Tests to teach in England, even though English-trained teachers must pass them.
From September 2012, candidates are permitted a maximum of 2 resits and if not successful, candidates cannot make further attempts for 2 years. The ICT test is no longer a requirement and is no longer available. Those who will begin ITT from September 2013 will have to pass the tests prior to enrolment on their ITT course.

==Citations==


