[[K. Muraleedharan]]

CATEGORIES: People from Thrissur, Malayali people, Indian politicians, Malayali politicians, 1957 births, Living people, People from Kozhikode, People from Kannur, Indian National Congress politicians from Kerala, 9th Lok Sabha members, 10th Lok Sabha members, 13th Lok Sabha members, Lok Sabha members from Kerala

K. Muraleedharan ([tpl]lang-ml|കെ. മുരളീധരന്‍[/tpl]) (born:14 May 1957) is the son of Famous Congress Leader and Former Kerala Chief Minister and Central Minister K.Karunakaran's Son and an  Indian politician from Kerala . He was elected as member of the Lok Sabha thrice (in 1989, 1991, and 1999) from the Kozhikode constituency, representing the Indian National Congress,IBN Candidate profile: K Muraleedharan subsequently leaving the party in 2005.

==Personal Life==

K. Muraleedharan was born to K. Karunakaran and Kalyani Kutty Amma in Thrissur City, Kerala on the 14 May 1957. He has one sister, Padmaja Venugopal, who has also entered politics. Their family hails from Chirakkal near Kannur. After studying for his BA at Mar Ivanios College, Trivandrum, he qualified in law from  Kerala Law Academy Law College. Muraleedharan is married and has two sons. He lists his hobbies as films and drama, football and badminton. The house 'Murali Mandiram' at Thrissur is named after him.13th Lok Sabha: Member Profiles
Muraleedharan is married to Jyothi.They have 2 sons Arun Narayanan & Sabari Nath.http://www.mangalam.com/mangalam-varika/152777?page=0,2

==Political career==

Muraleedharan started his political career within the Congress party as a Seva Dal worker. Thereafter, he held the posts of District Chairman and State Chief of Kerala Seva Dal.Kerala Legislative Assembly: Member profile
He was elected Member of Parliament from the Calicut (Kozhikode) constituency in the General Elections of 1989, winning re-election in 1991. In the 1996 general election, he lost his seat to the Janata Dal candidate M. P. Veerendra Kumar and subsequently failed in his come back attempt in the 1998 election, before regaining the seat in 1999. Thereafter, he held many posts within the local Kerala Congress Committee (KPCC) including General Secretary, Vice President and later President.
In February 2004, Muraleedharan was appointed Minister of Power in the A. K. Antony Ministry, though he was not a member of the Kerala Legislative Assembly.Muraleedharan sworn in Minister - The Hindu, Feb 12 2004 He was required to win a seat within six months to continue as minister, but lost the by-election from Wadakkancherry. Subsequently, he resigned in May that year. He is the only state Minister who was never MLA and never faced the legislative assembly.http://keralaassembly.org/min01.html
In 2005, when the Karunakaran faction of the Indian National Congress party had differences with the party leadership and the United Democratic Front (UDF), some members of the party quit and formed another party named Democratic Indira Congress (Karunakaran) (DIC(K)). They allied with the Left Democratic Front (LDF) for the local panchayat elections of 2005 and had some success. 
However, for the Kerala Assembly elections of 2006, DIC(K) made a pact with UDF as LDF declined to make any electoral arrangements with DIC(K). 
DIC(K) contested in 17 constituencies but managed to get elected only from 1 seat mostly because of grassroot level cross-voting by Congress. Muralidharan lost the election in Koduvally constituency to P.T.A.Rahim. 
With the future of the DIC(K) party untenable, some party members of the DIC(K) returned to the Congress party whilst others, including Karunakaran and Muraleedharan, decided instead to join the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP).
Later, Karunakaran rejoined the Congress party, while his son Muraleedharan opted to stay with the NCP, decrying his father's "betrayal".Return of Leader  Frontline, Jan 19 2008 Muraleedharan contested the 2009 Lok Sabha polls from the Wayanad constituency under the NCP ticket, but came only in third place, behind the Congress party and the CPI.http://www.keralaassembly.org/lok/sabha/poll_results.php4?year=2009&no=4
In August 2009, he was expelled from the NCP and sacked as state chief of the party, as he openly expressed his desire to rejoin the Congress party.Kerala leader K Muraleedharan refused re-entry into Congress - New Kerala/IANS, August 7, 2009 He was subsequently refused re-entry into the Congress party, the party leadership stating that the disparaging comments he had made about the party leadership whilst in opposition were too big a barrier to his re-joining.Muraleedharan meets Antony - The Hindu, Nov 21 2009 Muraleedharan pledged that he would "wait for any length of time" for the party to change its mind and readmit him, while his father Karunakaran stated that he would take up the matter with the national leadership of the Congress party, if necessary. He was readmitted to the Congress party in February 2011, and was given a ticket to contest the Assembly election from the Vattiyurkavu Assembly constituency (former Thiruvananthapuram North Constituency]. Subsequently, he won his first assembly election after he defeated ruling Communist Party of India-Marxist (CPI-M) supported independent candidate Cherian Philip by a margin of over 16,167 votes on May 14, 2011.http://expressbuzz.com/polls2011/Muraleedharan-wins-his-first-assembly-poll/274096.html

===Positions held===

==References==


