[[Next Century Foundation]]

CATEGORIES: Non-governmental organizations involved in the Israeli–Palestinian peace process, Organizations established in 1990

The Next Century Foundation (NCF) operates in various conflict zones across the globe. Originally established in 1990 to provide a forum for off-the-record discussions between Palestinians and Israelis, the organisation has expanded its remit by focusing on and operating in Iraq, Kashmir, Kosovo, Sudan, Egypt, Afghanistan, Yemen, Syria and Libya. In 2011, the organisation was pivotal in lobbying the UK and US governments for increased political and military support for the National Transitional Council in Libya. The organisation rose to particular prominence in April 2011, after an NCF fact-finding mission and policy recommendation in Benghazi and Misrata led to the deployment of predator drones over the war-torn country, pursuant to the aims of UNSC Res 1973. During the Libyan uprising, the organisation established a network of Libyan advisors who could provide crucial technical and political assistance to Western operations in the country.

==Activities==

The Foundation produces policy papers for submission to governments. Most NCF work is second track and behind the scenes. Examples are wide ranging. For instance the NCF has:

==International Media Awards==

Since 2005, an annual awards ceremony has been held by the International Council for Press and Broadcasting, a subsidiary body of the Next Century Foundation, in London to celebrate high standards of Middle East journalism. The Awards acknowledge journalists and broadcasters who, through the consistently high standard of their work, promote better understanding of the people and politics of the world. Though certainly not limited to the region, the Awards have historically had a special focus on the Middle East and South Asia.International Media Awardshttp://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ymKtq6nilpY
In September 2013, the International Council for Press and Broadcasting merged with the International Communication Forum in a move that will eventually see the Council dissolve with all of its activities, including the annual Media Awards, moving under the banner of the ICF.

==Organization==

The founding members were businessmen, politicians, journalist and diplomats including Claud Morris, Lord Arnold Weinstock, David Alliance, Baron Alliance CBE, Mr Jaweed al-Ghussein and Arnold Goodman, Baron Goodman and Haim Yosef Zadok.
The present Secretary General is William Morris (Next Century Foundation). The Co-ordinator is Maggie Tomkinson. The trustees are Hon Mark Gregory Hambley (USA), David Alliance, Baron Alliance of Manchester (UK), Mrs June Jacobs (UK), George Windsor, Earl of St Andrews (UK).
The Advisory Board of the Next Century Foundation includes: Andrew Stone, Baron Stone of Blackheath; The Lord Tugendhat; The Rt Hon Sir Jeremy Hanley KCMG; HE DR Mohamed Shaker; Mr Russell Twisk; HE Mr Eric Roleau; HE Nasser Bin Hamad M. Al-Khalifa.

==References==

==External links==

Official Websites
NCF Blogs
Other

