[[Henry H. Wells Middle School (Brewster, NY)]]

CATEGORIES: Public middle schools in New York, Schools in Putnam County, New York

Henry H. Wells Middle School is a middle school located in Brewster, NY, Putnam County, approximately fifty miles north of New York City.  The Henry H. Wells Middle School was the second school building known to the Brewster Central School District.  Opening in 1957, it was known as Brewster High School.  At that time, it housed grades 6 - 12.  Garden Street School served as the lone elementary building in the district for grades K - 5.  Over time, as the district continued to grow, the "new" Brewster High School could not keep up with the needs of the school community.  In 1972, when Brewster High School was opened on Foggintown Road, the existing high school was rededicated as the Henry H. Wells Middle School - a school designed to work with the unique characteristics of the middle school child, grades 6 - 8.  As the Brewster community continued to grow and prosper, the Middle School was called upon to assist by taking the fifth graders into their midst.  From September 1990 - January 1998, the Middle School served grades 5 - 8.  With the opening of C.V. Starr Intermediate School in January 1998, the building went back to grades 6 - 8.

==Mission statement==

The purpose of the Henry H. Wells Middle School is:

==Administration==

Principal: Miss Michelle Gosh
Assistant Principal: Mr. Andrew Cameron

==Guidance Counselors==

Our mission as school counselors at Henry H. Wells Middle School is to provide a comprehensive, developmentally, age appropriate and sequential school counseling program that is aligned with the New York State Learning Standards.  The Guidance Department focuses on the needs, interests, and issues related to the stages of student growth through academic, career, and personal/social development.  In partnership with students, staff, family, and community members, we will prepare students to become effective learners, achieve success in school, live successful and rewarding lives, and develop into contributing members of our society.
The school counselor provides the proactive leadership required to ensure every student is served.  They manage the comprehensive program with teachers, parents, and community agencies to meet the needs and academic standards of New York State.
The foundation, delivery, and management of the comprehensive school counseling program at Henry H. Wells Middle School are preventive in design and developmental in nature.  An Instructional Support Team meets weekly to oversee the implementation of guidance services at Henry H. Wells.
Guidance counselors also facilitate developmentally appropriate workshops to selected students.  Modules will include, but are not limited to:

===Counselors and Assignments===

==External links==


