[[Minister Fatakeshto]]

CATEGORIES: 2007 films, Indian films, Bengali-language films

Minister Fatakeshto is a Bengali film, in which Mithun Chakraborty and Koyel Mullick are in the lead role. It is the sequel of MLA Fatakeshto.

==Plot==

The film continues after the events of MLA Fatakeshto. MLA turned Home Minister, Fatakeshto, (Mithun Chakraborty) calls for discipline and pro-people attitude although has few co-ministers are against him. With his usual dialogue “ Marbo ekaney , Lash podbe soshane”(shall hit you here, but your body will fall at crematorium) bashes the goons right, left and middle. With his lady reporter reporting everything in “Star Ananda” a TV channel run by The Telegraph . 
However, the Chief Minister(Soumitra Chatterjee) is in favor of Fatakeshto . With 4000 Cores loss in Finance Department, Mithun  vows to take Finance Ministry and recover the loss in seven days time. The Chief Minister also bestows duty to Mithun removing the FM(one of the goons). With lot many hurdles on the way Mithun recovers almost Rs. 3700 Cores loss by booking ministers for their misappropriation of funds but is left out with 300 Cores balance.
In the meantime the arch villain calls all his group and plans to finish Fatakeshto. Further he also calls for 48 Hours strike (“Bangla Bandh”) which Mithun stops with his muscles. The villain then mixes dangerous germs in mineral water bottles which kills around 50 children in Bengal. This forces Mithun to bow down in front of the villain and request for life saving medicine lying with him to save the suffering children. With someone reporting about the mineral water mischief, Mithun gets the arch villain arrested for the crime soon.
In the final showdown, the left out 300 Croes is being collected through public donations dropped in big mud hundies(Lakshmi Badh). The villain comes out of jail on bail and loots the booty and takes it to an unknown destination to make Mithun responsible for the theft. One of the ministers who was with the villain somehow changes mind and informs Fatakeshto(Mithun) the location where the booty is hidden at. CM requests Mithun to go back to his role of GOONDAGARDI to recover people’s money. Finally Mithun jumps into the den of the villain and fights around 200 to 300 karate masters. He finally kills the villain and captures the booty. The lost money is returned to Chief Minister.

==Soundtrack==

This film has a rap song, sung by Mithun himself.

