[[Mirei Shigemori]]

CATEGORIES: People from Okayama Prefecture, Gardening in Japan, Japanese landscape architects, Kyoto, 1896 births, 1975 deaths

[tpl]nihongo|Mirei Shigemori|重森三玲|Shigemori Mirei|1896–1975[/tpl] was a notable modern Japanese landscape architect and historian of Japanese gardens.

==Life and career==

Mirei Shigemori was a garden designer who actively participated in many areas of Japanese art and design. Shigemori was born in Kayō, Jōbō District, Okayama Prefecture, and in his youth was exposed to lessons in traditional tea ceremony and flower arrangement, as well as landscape ink and wash painting. In 1917, he entered the Tokyo Fine Arts School to study nihonga, or Japanese painting, and later completed a graduate degree from the Department of Research.  In the early 1920s, he tried extensively to found a school of Japanese Culture, Bunka Daigakuin to synthesize the teaching of culture, but was foiled by the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake, which forced him to move back to his hometown near Kyoto.Christian Tschumi, Mirei Shigemori, Rebel in the Garden : Modern Japanese Landscape Architecture (Basel; Boston: Birkhäuser, 2007), 192.
He also intended to create a new style of ikebana,or flower arrangement, and produced art criticism and history writings, including the Complete Works of Japanese Flower Arrangement Art published in 1930, and the New Ikebana Declaration written with Sofu Teshigahara and Bunpo Nakayama in 1933.  Throughout his later gardening career, he maintained a voice in avant garde criticism of ikebana through publishing Ikebana Geijutsu magazine beginning in 1950, and through the founding of an ikebana study group called Byakutosha in 1949.
At the same time, he cultivated an interest and knowledge in traditional Japanese gardens.  He co-founded the Kyoto Rinsen Kyokai with others in 1932.  After the destruction caused by the Muroto typhoon in 1934, he began a survey of significant gardens in Japan.  In 1938, he finished publishing the 26-volume Illustrated Book on the History of the Japanese Garden, an unprecedented and meticulous documentation of major gardens in the country which he revised in 1971, shortly before his death.
He began practicing as a garden designer in 1914 with a garden and tea room on his family’s property.  His first major work was a design for the garden at Tofuku-ji Temple in 1939.   He designed 240 gardens, and worked mostly in karesansui, or dry landscape gardens.  Many of his gardens are on existing religious sites, but a few of his works are in cultural or commercial settings.  He also collaborated with Isamu Noguchi in choosing stones for the UNESCO Garden in Paris.

==Design Philosophy==

Shigemori’s work and writings reflect and interface with the changing political and cultural framework of Japan during his life.  Kendall Brown, in his preface to Mirei Shigemori:  Rebel in the Garden notes that “Shigemori embodies the central artistic quest of his era – a new direction in Japanese creativity founded on the desire to overcome a fundamental tension between the perceived polarities of dynamic Western Culture and the relative stasis attributed to the Asian tradition.”Christian Tschumi, Mirei Shigemori, Rebel in the Garden : Modern Japanese Landscape Architecture (Basel; Boston: Birkhäuser, 2007), 15. 
 
He was trained in nihonga, or Japanese painting, and drew on the traditional arts of ikebana (flower arrangement), and chado (tea ceremony), and Shinto, Buddhist, and Taoist cosmological ideas in his work.  At the same time, his work is closely tied to theories of the Primitive Modern explored by artists and architects like Isamu Noguchi, Kenzo Tange, and ikebana artists Sofu Teishigahara and Shuzo Takiguchi.  This movement drew on the energy of Japanese prehistoric arts of the Yayoi and Jomon periods, and allowed artists to “radicalize existing practices within the Japanese framework and thereby transcend the dichotomy of Japanese ‘tradition’ and western ‘modernity’.”ibid., 16  In his gardens, Shigemori recovers the primordial power that the Shinto tradition attributed to nature, yet works as a modernist artist-hero to innovate a traditional Japanese garden typology.
The text he wrote in 1971, titled the Shin Sakuteiki, summarizes his attitudes towards Japanese garden making in the 20th century.  He noted that contemporary approaches to Japanese landscape design gravitated to two extremes.  Traditionalists revered the built cultural environment, and strictly imitated their forms, and hoped that the use of these forms would “restore the values, ethics, and behaviors of the past.”Christian Tschumi, “Between Tradition and Modernity:  The Karesansui Gardens of Mirei Shigemori,”  Landscape Journal, no.1 (2006), 115.   On the other hand, modernists saw the past as a relic, or obstacle to be discarded, and old forms were seen as a “negative against which to measure progress.”Ibid, 115.   In his argument, Shigemori argued for a hybrid approach, in which the past would inform and give cultural resonance to present developments in form.   He advocated for studying the past masters, and that designers should “emulate their way to invention rather than the results achieved, (so) gardenmakers could distill the most valuable inspiration for their work.” Ibid, 116.  Shigemori’s work reflects this idea of culturally grounded innovation.  He spoke extensively of the growing estrangement between people and the primordial power of nature, and his gardens are full of hybrid symbols that seek to reveal the cultural and natural histories their sites.  Traditional garden forms are reinterpreted with modern materials and attempt to reengage the viewer with the ever developing continuum of Japanese culture.

==Major Projects==

==Books by Shigemori Translated into English==

==Notes==

==References==


