[[Barin Mazumder]]

CATEGORIES: Bangladeshi musicians, 1919 births, 2002 deaths, Bangladeshi singers

Barin Mazumder ([tpl]lang-bn|বারীণ মজুমদার[/tpl]) (February 15, 1919 – 2002) was a Bangladeshi classical musician. His wife Ila Mazumder is also an artist. He has two sons Bappa Mazumder and Partho Mazumder.

==Early life==

Barin Mazumder was born into an aristocratic Jamindar family at Radhanagar in Pabna District. Despite the wealth of the family, the Mazumders were deeply involved with culture. His father Nishendra Mazumder was an artist and dramatist. His mother used to play sitar. At the age of three he suffered from typhoid. He picked up exercise as a hobby and was a member of Bishnupada Ghosh’s exercise club.
To nurture his interest in music his father took him to Kolkata where he first learnt music from Vishmadev Chatterjee. The first Raag that he learnt was “Raag Bhupali”. Two years later when his guru became shonnasi he came back to Pabna, but Mazumder was not satisfied and wanted to go to Lucknow to study music in Maurice Music School. But his uncle who was the patriarch (korta) of the family did not allow him to go. Instead, he brought Ustad Roghurangan Gushwami from Lucknow to teach him music at home. At home he managed to finish the Maurice College course, but his desire to go to Lucknow made him decide to leave home.
When he reached Lucknow, some Bengali boys helped to take him to the Bengali hotel. At the time, Uday Shankar and Ravi Shankar were also in that hotel. At the college he met with his friend and fellow musician Chinmoy Lahiri. Lahiri took him to the principal of the Maurice Music School and he was admitted into the third year. Lahiri taught him music beside college classes. Later, Mazumder was attracted o Foiaz Khan and became his novice.
One day when he was in a debate about a topic with Sunil, suddenly Sunil said that Mazumder could not sing. This seemed to be the turning point of his career as he challenged him and said he would become better than him in three months. After that he continued with his Rewaz (musical practice) and soon his song was faster than Sunil's. Then one day as Sunil was in a show he went and performed the Raag of Sunil faster and this made Sunil understand his fault. As he continued to prepare him for music the time of partition came closer. During that time the fees that came from home stopped and he had to struggle hard to even manage the money to return home. He mortgaged his favourite tanpura and returned to Pabna during that very turbulent period.
After the partition of India when most of his neighbors had to cross the border, he stayed for the love of his homeland, but the riches and wealth which were made over the generations weres mostly looted and hunted by the miscreants. The real admirer of his talent was also nowhere to be seen as he had not had the opportunity. The toughness and loneliness at that time made him frustrated and depressed.
With most of his family property long gone Mazumder had to work hard. He once even bought a camera and related equipment to run a photography business, but soon lost interest and left the business. Fighting with severe frustration and depression, Mazumder had to pass his timesonly with his favourite hunting. He was really fond of hunting, and according to his wife Illa Mazumder his story would not be completed if it does not include a lot of things about his hunting.

==External links==



