[[Commander Xavier]]

CATEGORIES: Galactica 1980 characters

Xavier was a recurring character in the TV series Galactica 1980. In the pilot episode, "Galactica Discovers Earth" he's played by actor Richard Lynch. In his next and final appearance in "Spaceball", he is played by actor Jeremy Brett.
Xavier was a member of the Colonial Fleet's Quorum of Twelve, and was accorded the rank of "commander". He wore a Colonial uniform at the beginning of the pilot, so he may have been master of one of the ships in the Fleet (like Commander Kronus of the Celestra in the original series episode "Take the Celestra").
Xavier may also have been a Ph.D. While in Nazi Germany in "Galactica Discovers Earth, Part 2", he's addressed as "Dr. Xavier".
However, throughout Galactica 1980, there was no consistency to the pronunciation of Xavier's name. One way was with a silent "x" pronounced as a "z" and a short "a" ("ZA-vee-er"); another was with the "x" pronounced before the "z" and a long "a" ("ex-ZAY-vier"); and a third was with a silent "x" pronounced as a "z", a short "a", and the third syllable was pronounced "ar" ("ZA-vee-ar").
Xavier appears to have been a highly discontented member of the Colonial Fleet. When the Quorum learns that Earth is not technologically advanced enough to resist the Cylons, Xavier immediately advocates time travel to Earth's past to accelerate present-day Earth's technology.
Commander Adama, Doctor Zee and the Quorum say "no", so Xavier steals a time-travel-capable Colonial Viper and goes back to Nazi Germany in June 1944, just before the V-2 rocket is tested. He tinkers with it to increase its accuracy and explosive yield, but Lieutenant Dillon foils his plan by shooting it down. The Nazis are just about to execute Xavier, but he escapes back in time to Earth in 1980.
Next, he attempts to coerce physicist Dr. Mortinson (Robert Reed) into dealing with him, not the friendly Dillon and Captain Troy. Xavier begins citing various points in Earth history where he can try again to accelerate the technology, but Mortinson is alerted to Xavier's scheme and (somehow) escapes with his life.
Xavier must now leave Earth, but first he has to "re-energize" his stolen Viper at a United States Air Force base. With Troy and Dillon at his heels, Xavier once again time-travels away, destination unknown.
When he appears again in "Spaceball", he's altered his appearance to match that of Colonial warrior Lieutenant Nash. He tricks Troy and Dillon into leaving the Galactican children in his care while the two warriors depart Earth in his Viper. However, Xavier has rigged the fighter ship to break down in space, strand Troy and Dillon and, eventually, suffocate them.
On Earth, Xavier takes the children and Jamie Hamilton hostage, hoping to bargain with Adama for their lives. However, Adama refuses to cooperate. Troy and Dillon race back to Earth, after repairing the damage to the Viper, and engage Xavier in a brief chase/shootout. Once again, however, Xavier escapes ...
... and with that, his story ends as Galactica 1980 is cancelled.

==External links==


