[[Ramsay MacDonald]]

CATEGORIES: 1866 births, 1937 deaths, Ramsay MacDonald, Alumni of Birkbeck, University of London, British Secretaries of State, British Secretaries of State for Foreign Affairs, Fellows of the Royal Society (Statute 12), Independent Labour Party MPs, Leaders of the Labour Party (UK), Leaders of the House of Commons, Labour Party (UK) MPs, Lord Presidents of the Council, National Labour (UK) politicians, Members of the Executive of the Labour and Socialist International, Members of London County Council, Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom, Members of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for university constituencies, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for Scottish constituencies, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for Welsh constituencies, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for English constituencies, People associated with the campaign for Scottish devolution, People from Lossiemouth, Politics of Moray, Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom, Scottish Presbyterians, Social Democratic Federation members, UK MPs 1906–10, UK MPs 1910, UK MPs 1910–18, UK MPs 1922–23, UK MPs 1923–24, UK MPs 1924–29, UK MPs 1929–31, UK MPs 1931–35, UK MPs 1935–45, Members of the Fabian Society, Scottish political writers, People who died at sea

James Ramsay MacDonald, FRS[tpl]cite doi|10.1098/rsbm.1939.0007[/tpl] (12 October 1866 – 9 November 1937) was a British statesman who was the first ever Labour Party Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, leading a Labour Government in 1924, a Labour Government from 1929 to 1931, and a National Government from 1931 to 1935.
Historians credit MacDonald, along with Keir Hardie and Arthur Henderson, as one of the three principal founders of the Labour Party. His speeches, pamphlets and books made him an important theoretician, but he played an even more important role as Leader of the Labour Party. He entered Parliament in 1906 and was the Chairman of the Labour MPs from  1911–14. His opposition to the First World War made him unpopular, and he was defeated in 1918. The fading of wartime passions made it easier for an anti-war politician to find a platform, and he returned to Parliament in 1922, which was the point at which Labour replaced the Liberal Party as the second-largest party.
His first government — formed with Liberal support — in 1924 lasted nine months, but was defeated at the 1924 General Election when the Conservatives made large gains at the expense of the Liberals and won a majority. Nevertheless his short term demonstrated that the Labour party was sufficiently competent and well organized to run the government. A powerful orator, by the 1920s he had earned great public respect for his pacifism. 
He initially put his faith in the League of Nations. However by the early 1930s he felt that the internal cohesion of the British Empire, a protective tariff, and an independent British defense program would be the wisest British policy. Nevertheless budget pressures, and a strong popular pacifist sentiment, forced a reduction in the military and naval budgets.A.J.P. Taylor, English History 1914-1945 (1965), pp. 359-70
Labour returned to power—this time as the largest party—in 1929 but was soon overwhelmed by the crisis of the Great Depression, in which the Labour government was split by demands for public spending cuts to preserve the Gold Standard. In 1931, MacDonald formed a National Government in which only two of his Labour colleagues agreed to serve and the majority of whose MPs were from the Conservatives. As a result, MacDonald was expelled from the Labour Party, which accused him of betrayal. The Gold Standard soon had to be abandoned after the Invergordon Mutiny and MacDonald's National Government won a huge "doctor's mandate" at the 1931 General Election, at which the Labour Party was reduced to a rump of around 50 seats in the House of Commons.
MacDonald remained Prime Minister of the National Government from 1931 to 1935; during this time his health rapidly deteriorated and he became increasingly ineffective as a leader. He stood down as Prime Minister in 1935—losing his seat in the General Election that year and returning for a different constituency—but stayed in the Cabinet as Lord President of the Council until retiring from the government in 1937 and dying, still an MP, later that year.

==Early life==

===Lossiemouth===

MacDonald was born at Gregory Place, Lossiemouth, Morayshire, Scotland, the illegitimate son of John MacDonald, a farm labourer, and Anne Ramsay, a housemaid.Marquand, David: Ramsay MacDonald, London, 1977, pp. 4-5 Although registered at birth as James McDonald sic Ramsay, he was known as Jaimie MacDonald. Illegitimacy could be a serious handicap in 19th-century Presbyterian Scotland, but in the north and northeast farming communities, this was less of a problem; in 1868 a report of the Royal Commission on the Employment of Children, Young Persons and Women in Agriculture noted that the illegitimacy rate was around 15%.Marquand, p. 6 His mother had worked as a domestic servant at Claydale farm, near Alves, where her future husband was also employed. They were to have been married, but the wedding never took place, either because the couple quarrelled and chose not to marry, or because Anne's mother, Isabella Ramsay, stepped in to prevent her daughter from marrying a man she deemed unsuitable.Marquand, p. 5
Ramsay MacDonald received an elementary education at the Free Church of Scotland school in Lossiemouth from 1872 to 1875, and then at Drainie parish school. He left school at the end of the summer term in 1881, at the age of 15, and began work on a nearby farm.Marquand, p. 12 He was not to be destined for a working life in agriculture. In December 1881 he was appointed as a pupil teacher at Drainie parish school (the entry in the school register of staff recording him as 'J. MacDonald').Drainie School log books He remained in this post until 1 May 1885, when he left to take up a position as an assistant to Mordaunt Crofton, a clergyman in Bristol who was attempting to establish a Boys' and Young Men's Guild at St Stephen's Church.Lord Elton: The life of James Ramsay MacDonald, 1939, London, p. 39Marquand, p. 15 It was in Bristol that Ramsay MacDonald joined the Democratic Federation, an extreme Radical sect. This federation changed its name a few months later to the Social Democratic Federation (SDF).Bryher, Samual: An Account of the Labour and Socialist Movement in Bristol, 1929Elton, p.44 He remained in the group when it left the SDF to become the Bristol Socialist Society. MacDonald returned to Lossiemouth before the end of the year for reasons unknown, but in early 1886 once again left for London.Marquand, pp. 9, 17

===London===

MacDonald had left for London because a friend living there had written to tell him of a post which was vacant, and which might suit him. However, when he arrived he found that it had already been filled.Marquand, p. 19 Following a short period of work addressing envelopes at the National Cyclists' Union in Fleet Street, he found himself unemployed and forced to live on the small amount of money he had saved from his time in Bristol. MacDonald eventually found employment as an invoice clerk in the City warehouse of Cooper, Box and Co.,.Tracey, Herbert: J. Ramsay MacDonald, 1924, p. 29 During this time he was deepening his socialist credentials, and engaged himself energetically in C. L. Fitzgerald's Socialist Union which, unlike the SDF, aimed to progress socialist ideals through the parliamentary system.Marquand, p. 20 thumb|left|Bloody Sunday 1887MacDonald witnessed the Bloody Sunday of 13 November 1887 in Trafalgar Square, and in response, had a pamphlet published by the Pall Mall Gazette, entitled Remember Trafalgar Square: Tory Terrorism in 1887.Marquand, p. 21
MacDonald retained an interest in Scottish politics. Gladstone's first Irish Home Rule Bill inspired the setting-up of a Scottish Home Rule Association in Edinburgh. On 6 March 1888, MacDonald took part in a meeting of London-based Scots, who, upon his motion, formed the London General Committee of Scottish Home Rule Association.Morgan, J. Ramsay MacDonald (1987) p. 17 He continued to support home rule for Scotland, but with little support from London Scots forthcoming, his enthusiasm for the committee waned and from 1890 he took little part in its work.Marquand, p. 23 However, MacDonald never lost his interest in Scottish politics and home rule, and in his Socialism: critical and constructive, published in 1921, he wrote: "The Anglification of Scotland has been proceeding apace to the damage of its education, its music, its literature, its genius, and the generation that is growing up under this influence is uprooted from its past."[tpl]cite book|last=MacDonald|first=James Ramsay|title=Socialism: critical and constructive|publisher=Cassell and Company Ltd|year=1921|series=Cassell's social economics series[/tpl]
Politics in the 1880s was still of less importance to MacDonald than furthering himself in employment. To this end he took evening classes in science, botany, agriculture, mathematics, and physics at the Birkbeck Literary and Scientific Institution but his health suddenly failed him due to exhaustion one week before his examinations. This put an end to his having any career in science.Elton, pp. 56–57 In 1888, MacDonald took employment as private secretary to Thomas Lough who was a tea merchant and a Radical politician.Conor Cruise O' Brien, Parnell and his Party 1957, p. 275 Lough was elected as the Liberal Member of Parliament (MP) for West Islington, in 1892. Many doors now opened to MacDonald. He had access to the National Liberal Club as well as the editorial offices of Liberal and Radical newspapers. He also made himself known to various London Radical clubs and with Radical and labour politicians. MacDonald gained valuable experience in the workings of electioneering. In 1892, he left Lough’s employment to become a freelance journalist. As a member of the Fabian Society for some time, MacDonald toured and lectured on its behalf at the London School of Economics and elsewhere.Marquand, p. 22

==Active politics==

The TUC had created the Labour Electoral Association (LEA) and entered into an unsatisfactory alliance with the Liberal Party in 1886.Marquand, p. 31 In 1892, MacDonald was in Dover to give support to the candidate for the LEA in the General Election and who was well beaten. MacDonald impressed the local pressDover Express, 17 June 1892; 12 August 1892 and the Association, however, and was adopted as its candidate. MacDonald, though, announced that his candidature would be under a Labour Party banner.Dover Express, 7 October 1892 He denied that the Labour Party was a wing of the Liberal Party but saw merit in a working relationship. In May 1894, the local Southampton Liberal Association was trying to find a labour minded candidate for the constituency. MacDonald along with two others were invited to address the Liberal Council. One of three men turned down the invitation and MacDonald failed to secure the candidature despite the strong support he had among Liberals.Marquand, p. 35
In 1893, Keir Hardie had formed the Independent Labour Party (ILP) which had established itself as a mass movement and so in May 1894 MacDonald applied for membership of, and was accepted into, the ILP. He was officially adopted as the ILP candidate for one of the Southampton seats on 17 July 1894Southampton Times, 21 July 1894 but was heavily defeated at the election of 1895. MacDonald stood for Parliament again in 1900 for one of the two Leicester seats and although he lost was accused of splitting the Liberal vote to allow the Conservative candidate to win.Marquand, p. 73 That same year he became Secretary of the Labour Representation Committee (LRC), the forerunner of the Labour Party, while retaining his membership of the ILP. The ILP, while not a Marxist party, was more rigorously socialist than the future Labour Party in which the ILP members would operate as a "ginger group" for many years. [tpl]Citation needed|date=March 2011[/tpl]
As Party Secretary, MacDonald negotiated an agreement with the leading Liberal politician Herbert Gladstone (son of the late Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone), which allowed Labour to contest a number of working-class seats without Liberal opposition,Mackintosh, John P. (Ed.): British Prime Ministers in the twentieth Century, London, 1977, p. 157 thus giving Labour its first breakthrough into the House of Commons. He married Margaret Ethel Gladstone, who was unrelated to the Gladstones of the Liberal Party, in 1896. Margaret MacDonald was comfortably off, although not wealthy.MacDonald Papers, P.R.O. 3/95 This allowed them to indulge in foreign travel, visiting Canada and the United States in 1897, South Africa in 1902, Australia and New Zealand in 1906 and to India several times.
It was during this period that MacDonald and his wife began a long friendship with the social investigator and reforming civil servant Clara ColletMcDonald, Deborah, Clara Collet 1860–1948: An Educated Working Woman; Routledge: 2004Diary of Clara Collet: Warwick Modern Records Office with whom he discussed women's issues. She influenced MacDonald and other politicians in their attitudes towards women and especially their work. In 1901, he was elected to the London County Council for Finsbury Central as a joint Labour–Progressive Party candidate, but he was disqualified from the register in 1904 due to his absences abroad.Morgan, A., p. 30
In 1906, the LRC changed its name to the "Labour Party", and absorbed the ILP.Clegg, H.A;, Fox, Alan; Thompson, A.F.: A History of British Trade Unions since 1889, 1964, vol I, p. 388 In that same year, MacDonald was elected MP for Leicester along with 28 others,Leicester Pioneer, 20 January 1906 and became one of the leaders of the Parliamentary Labour Party. These Labour MPs undoubtedly owed their election to the ‘Progressive Alliance’ between the Liberals and Labour which at this time was a minor party supporting the Liberal governments of Henry Campbell-Bannerman and Herbert Henry Asquith. MacDonald became the leader of the left wing of the party, arguing that Labour must seek to displace the Liberals as the main party of the left. [tpl]Citation needed|date=December 2012[/tpl]

==Party leader==

