[[Ministry of Environment (Pakistan)]]

CATEGORIES: Government ministries of Pakistan, Conservation in Pakistan, Cabinet of Pakistan, Environment ministries, Environment of Pakistan, Forestry in Pakistan, Forestry ministries

The Ministry of Environment (or MoE), is a Cabinet-level ministry of Government of Pakistan, tasked and primary responsible for planning, coordinating, promoting, protecting and overseeing the policy implementation of government sanctioned environmental and forestry programmes in the country. Its government activities includes conservation, survey of fauna, flora, forestry, wildlife (including Wildflowers); protection and prevention of pollution control, afforestation, and land degradation mitigatio. The MoE is also responsible for administrating and establishing the National Parks of Pakistan. 
The ministrial department or MoE is administrated by the Environment Minister of Pakistan who is also a leading member of cabinet of Prime minister of Pakistan. Currently, Hameed Jan Afridi is currently tenuring as the Environmental Minister of Pakistan. The MoE also contains the Secretary of Environment, a top level bureaucratic position in the ministry, and its current environment secretary is Eijaz Kureshi. The appointments and assignments are usually given to the members commissioned by the Civil Services, which is also under the administration and supervision of the Ministry of Environment.
The MoE has also contained the separate and autonomous government department— Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency (Pakistan EPA). The EPA is a leading department of the MoE, usually tasked to handle the air pollution, radioactive waste management, promotion of civilian usage of environmental isotopes, while it also has the responsible to implementing and enforcing the Pakistan Environmental Protection Act in the country. 
Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency is an attached department of the Ministry of Environment and responsible to implement the Pakistan Environmental Protection Act, 1997 in the country. An Act to provide for the protection, conservation, rehabilitation and improvement of environment, for the prevention and control of pollution, and promotion of sustainable development. Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency also provides all kind of technical assistance to the Ministry of Environment for formulation of environment policy and programmes.

==Provisional departments==

==See also==

==External links==


