[[John Stewart Socha]]

CATEGORIES: American radio personalities, Year of birth missing (living people), Living people, American technology writers, American journalists, American Roman Catholics, EBay, People from Spring Grove, Minnesota

John Stewart Socha is a Spring Grove, Minnesota-based radio broadcaster and journalist who specializes in technology subjects.  
Socha, originally working on the air as John Stewart, began his broadcasting career in 1981 was an on-air personality at WTMJ in Milwaukee, and later hosted the "Morning Report" at WOAI in San Antonio, Texas. In 1990, he relocated to Spring Grove, Minnesota to create ACPress.com, which offered audio and mixed media tutorials for new computer users.  He also produced The Radio Computer Magazine, which was syndicated on the Sun Radio Network, and was a guest commentator on high-tech issues for the Business News Network, WBAL radio in Baltimore, and the Australian Triple M Network's weekly Byte This program. 
Socha also wrote articles on both digital and film photography, using the byline "John Stewart," for eDigitalPhoto and Shutterbug magazines. They can now be found in the Shutterbug web site archives.Shutterbug archivesACPress.com  He has also been cited in numerous publications as an expert in high-tech issues.Hartford Courant
From 2001 - 2006, he was station manager for WKBH, a Roman Catholic radio station in La Crosse, Wisconsin.LaCross Tribune coverage  Socha now produces radio, television and multimedia projects for a number of non-profit organizations, including the Catholic Diocese of LaCrosse and the Shrine of Our Lady of Guadalupe 
To date, Socha has produced and narrated 12 audio tutorials, ranging from the 1994 “The DOS Tape” to computer-based CDs tutorials for first-time users of digital cameras and eBay auctions.  His wife, book designer and editor Alice Andersen, has co-written and co-produced these tutorials.Alice Andersen web site Socha has also brought his expertise to Western Technical College in LaCrosse, where he teaches a non-credit courses on digital photography.Western Technical College web site
Socha received the 2005 Distinguished Netizen Award from SharewareJunkies.com for his work in high-tech journalism and computer education.News coverage of the 2005 SharewareJunkies.com Awards
For more than four years, he has answered listeners' questions on a popular statewide mid-day show hosted by Larry Meillor on Wisconsin Public Radio (wpr.org).  He published (2012) the (printed) book, "How To Use The Digital Camera You Just Bought!" and an updated (2013) printing will be available shortly.  ePub and other versions are in consideration. More info on the book and sample pages (downloadable PDF)at www.acpress.com or at www.yourbookinprint.com.

==References==

==External links==


