[[Civil Defence Medal]]

CATEGORIES: Civil awards and decorations of the United Kingdom

The Civil Defence Medal (CDM) was a long service award in the United Kingdom and associated territories, instituted by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II in March 1961 and awarded for 15 years continuous sparetime voluntary service in a variety of different organizations including the Auxiliary Fire Service, National Hospital Service Reserve, United Kingdom Warning and Monitoring Organisation and the Civil Defence Corps. CDM Qualification was extended in 1965 to Civil Defence personnel in Gibraltar, Hong Kong, Malta, Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.
No Civil Defence Medals have been awarded since 2007 and none on the mainland UK since 1992.  Two members of the Isle of Man Civil Defence Corps were presented with clasps to the Civil Defence Long Service Medal in 2011 at a ceremony at Government House Isle of Man by His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor, Vice Admiral Sir Paul Haddacks KCB KStJ.

==Description==

An oval medallion measuring 38mm high by 32mm wide in a silver coloured  cupro nickel metal. On the obverse is the crowned head of Queen Elizabeth II and the legend ELIZABETH II DEI GRATIA REGINA FID. DEF.  The reverse of the medal depicts three shields bearing the initials of the three main services "CD",  "AFS" and "NHSR" with an oak branch in the background. A separate Northern Ireland version existed with the lower shields bearing "AFRS" and "HRS". 
A  bar clasp bearing the words "LONG SERVICE" was issued for each further period of 12 years service. The medal ribbon was dark blue with three stripes of yellow red and green. (the yellow being worn farthest from the left shoulder.)
Miniature medals for wear at black tie events remain available from several commercial sources.

==Naming==

The medals were issued unnamed

==Disestablishment of the recipient organisations==

With the disbandment of the Auxiliary Fire Service, National Hospital Service Reserve, and the Civil Defence Corps in 1968 only members of the United Kingdom Warning and Monitoring Organisation continued to receive the medal on the UK mainland. Since the disestablishment of the UKWMO as well, the CDM has not been awarded on the UK mainland since 1992, although it was retained and awarded to volunteers of certain voluntary organisations on the Isle of Man (ongoing) and the Warning and Monitoring Organisation on the Channel Islands until June 2007.
Should any of the former voluntary organisations be reformed in the future or similar organisations established, the Civil Defence Medal remains extant and awards would recommence.

==References==


