[[Kenny Bruce Williams]]

CATEGORIES: Characters in the Left Behind series

Kenny Bruce Williams is a fictional character in the Left Behind series, by Tim LaHaye and Jerry B. Jenkins.
Kenny is the son of Cameron "Buck" Williams and Chloe Steele Williams, named after martyred believers Ken Ritz and Bruce Barnes. He is born during the Tribulation, in the book Apollyon. He is taken care of by his grandfather, Rayford Steele, when Buck goes to Jerusalem to help defend it in Armageddon. He is reunited with his parents in Glorious Appearing. Jesus promises Buck and Chloe that because they lost Kenny they would be repaid by the hundredfold. Because of that they start a massive daycare ministry called COT(Children of the Tribulation), which focused on teaching children and trying to show them that Jesus is the only way. Kenny is the first child in COT.
Ninety-some years later, Kenny is working at COT and is now living on his own. When one of the workers, Cendrillon Jospin dies at one hundred, It creates an uproar among the believers since only unbelievers die. Not wanting anyone to follow Cendrillon's path, but knowing many will, Kenny, Raymie Steele, Bahira Abaneh, and Zaki Abaneh form the Millennium Force, a branch off of the Tribulation Force. 
At Cendrillon's funeral, Kenny (who has the only non-glorified body of the four) meets Cendrillon's cousins from France, who are in deep with TOL (The Other Light), a secret organization that worships Lucifer. He goes under cover for the  Millennium Force. He also meets Ekaterina Risto and falls in love with her. When a friend of Zaki, Qasim Marid, goes undercover for the Force without their permission, they all start to wonder where his loyties lie. When Kenny goes to France, he meets up with the Johpins and their other cousin, Nicolette. They head to Jordan where Kenny is seen by Abdullah Smith. After being accused of switching loyties, he is kicked out of the Millennium Force, deserted by Ekaterina, and hardly believed by his parents. 
This causes Kenny's life to fall apart, and while he is extremely lonely, he trusts in God to deliver him in the end. Kat finally goes to talk to Kenny and realizes that he is innocent. Qasim is discovered as the real infiltrator at COT and fired, eventually dying at the age of one hundred along with the Johpins and Nicolette. Kenny later marries Kat and they have eight sons and six daughters. They go on to establish a branch of COT in Greece, as was Kat's lifelong dream. 
As he is a natural, Kenny ages over the course of the Millennium, with both he and Kat unable to walk without walking sticks. Both Kenny and his wife are present at the final battle of the Millennium and they, along with all the other believers, are welcomed into heaven.

