[[McCluer High School]]

CATEGORIES: High schools in St. Louis County, Missouri, Public high schools in Missouri

McCluer High School is a high school located in Florissant, Missouri. The principal is Gary Spiller, and the school is the home of the McCluer Comets. It is a part of the Ferguson-Florissant School District.

==History==

When McCluer opened its doors in 1957, it was a junior high school. The history of McCluer is more than just McCluer: it goes back to the mid to late 19th century.
Ferguson School Central School
Ferguson School, at 201 Wesley Avenue,opened in 1880 in the Ferguson Public School District, in Ferguson, Missouri. In 1903 the name of Ferguson School was changed to Central School. The high school students attending Central School transferred to the new John M. Vogt High School in 1930. The school is now Central Elementary School. 
The school currently has 1,530 students enrolled.
Built as a grammar school building (grades 1-8) between 1877 and 1880, Ferguson School (later called Central School) is significant as an early focal point of Feguson's EDUCATION, SOCIAL, and CULTURAL history and symbol of community pride. Expanded in 1903 to provide one of the first accredited four-year public high schools in St. Louis County, the building has been continuously used as a public school for over 100 years, maintaining its integrity of use. The original four room building remains intact as the core of the present elementary school (Central Elementary School) with additions dating from 1895, 1904, 1908, and 1925-27.
'''
John M. Vogt High School
Located at 200 Church Avenue in Feguson, Missouri and named for a merchant and former school board member, John M. Vogt High School opened in 1930. It was built on the grounds of an open air theatre; property which was donated to the Ferguson Public School Distrcit by the Community Hall Association. John M. Vogt HIgh School was the first building in the Ferguson School District to be used strictly for high school students. The new high school opened with students that had transferred from Central School. Now Vogt Elementary School, John M. Vogt High School's yearbook, which began in 1931, was named the "Crest."
Ferguson High School
With 400 students that transferred from John M. Vogt HIgh School, Ferguson High School opened in 1939. It was built by the Ferguson Public School District on the (rumored to be haunted) January Estate; which had also been used as the city dump and was known as Blizzard Hill. Located at 701 January Avenue, the school was constructed with WPA, Works Progress Administration, financial assistance. In the basement of the school was a firing range for target practice by students belonging to the school's NRA Club. 1952 saw the merger of the Ferguson Public School District and the Florissant School District. Ferguson High School's last graduating class was in 1962; with the school becoming Ferguson Junior High; now Ferguson Middle School. Perhaps you were a camper or a counselor there in the summer at Camp Comet! The Ferguson High School's yearbook was named the "Crest."
McCluer High School
McCluer, which is located at 1896 South New Florissant Road, Florissant, Missouri, opened in 1957 as a junior high school. It is a part of the Ferguson Florissant School District. In 1962, when Ferguson High School closed, its students moved to McCluer; now McCluer Senior High School. McCluer's mascot is the Comets. The school colors are red,white,and blue. The name of the school newspaper is the "Scoop." McCluer High School's yearbook is named the "Crest."
McCluer High School was named for Virgil C. McCluer, superintendent of the Ferguson School District for 30 years until he retired in 1964.

==External links==


