[[Thomas Sobotzik]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, People from Gliwice, Living people, German footballers, German expatriate footballers, German people from the Polish part of Silesia, German people of Silesian descent, German people of Polish descent, Eintracht Frankfurt players, Eintracht Frankfurt II players, FC St. Pauli players, 1. FC Kaiserslautern players, SK Rapid Wien players, 1. FC Union Berlin players, SpVgg Unterhaching players, Bundesliga players, 2. Bundesliga players, Expatriate footballers in Austria, Expatriate footballers in Norway, Association football midfielders, Sandefjord Fotball players, FSV Frankfurt players, Norwegian Premier League players, Austrian Football Bundesliga players

Thomas Sobotzik ([tpl]lang-pl|Tomasz Sobocki[/tpl]; born October 16, 1974 in Gliwice) is a German footballer from Polish part of Silesia, who currently plays for 1. FC Oberstedten.

==Career==

Thomas Sobotzik started his footballing career at local club Pogon Zabrze. When he was nine years old, he moved to Górnik Zabrze. In 1987 the Sobotzik family moved to Frankfurt and soon joined  Eintracht Frankfurt.Thomas Sobotzik at eintracht-archiv.de During his stint at VfB Stuttgart he became twice German junior champion and returned to Frankfurt in 1990. At the age of 17 he signed at professional contract. Due to a heavy knee injury he had to pause a long time in 1991.
With 20 years he finally debuted in the Bundesliga. After two seasons at FC St. Pauli a short stint at Kaiserslautern he returned both times to Eintracht. In 2001 Lothar Matthäus signed him for Rapid Wien. Via Union Berlin he came to SpVgg Unterhaching in 2004 where he captained the side in his last season at the Bavarian club.Einmal Unioner, immer Unioner! - Thomas Sobotzik
Thomas Sobotzik appeared in 134 Bundesliga matches (19 goals) und in 110 2nd Bundesliga fixtures (17 goals).Sobotzik: „Als Djorkaeff kam, war mein Zug abgefahren“
In 2007 he moved to Norwegian side Sandefjord Fotball. Sobotzik signed a one-year contract and moved to German Regionalliga team FSV Frankfurt in January 2008. After eighteen months was released from FSV Frankfurt and joined in summer 2009 to 1. FC Oberstedten.Einmal Unioner, immer Unioner!

==Coaching career==

Sobotzik began his coaching career in 2008 as Assistant Coach of the U-17 from 1. FC Oberstedten.Endstation Oberstedten ...

==References==


