[[Sha Tin Junior School]]

CATEGORIES: English Schools Foundation schools, Educational institutions established in 1988, Primary schools in Hong Kong, Fo Tan

Sha Tin Junior School is a primary school run by the English Schools Foundation in Fo Tan, Sha Tin, Hong Kong. 
The school opened in 1988, and the founding principal Gordon Lewis remained in this post until his retirement in 2004. He was subsequently awarded an OBE in recognition of his services to education in Hong Kong. After the Retirement of Mr Lewis, the new assigned principal was Dr Allan Weston who later resigned at the end of the 2008 -09 school year to take over the CEO position at Taipei European School in Taiwan. Since June 2009 the principal has been Mr Perry Tunesi.
The school now has a 5-class entry for each year group with a total of around 900 students. The facilities include a swimming pool, a multi-purpose sports hall (with badminton, basketball, volleyball, and climbing facilities), and an Astro-turf pitch, all shared with Sha Tin College.
It provides for children from Year One to Year Six, and each class is named by its year group first followed by another number (from 1 to 5) e.g. Y5.2

==Curriculum==

Sha Tin Junior School has recently adopted the Primary Years Programme (PYP) of the International Baccalaureate Organization. 
The school teaches general subjects such as: Maths, English, Chinese, Music, PE, ICT and also 'Units of Inquiry': there are six units per year (two per term), and each one will focus on particular subjects such as Geography, Art, History, Science etc.

==Houses==

Sha Tin Junior School has four houses, named after the four major bridges across the nearby Shing Mun River.  
Students are usually placed in the same house as any siblings who are or were at the school.
The School uses these houses to organize a reward system called "House Points". House points basically means that for every good deed or good piece of work a student does, the teacher would give them a "house point(s)". The number can normally range for 1 to 5 but sometimes teachers may even give 10 at a time. The student who receive(s) a house point would then put on a tally somewhere in the class according to what house they are in. Every week the tally is counted by the P6 monitors and put onto the main counting board. At the end of every academic year the total number of house points a house collects is counted up with the number of house points for sports days and swimming galas to give the total number of points for each house. The house with the most points wins the "House Cup" for a year and the house name is displayed on Cup in the main office.

==Facilities==

There is a learning centre, arts room, sports hall, technology room, ICT room, roof playground and in the new block built in 2002, there is a 25-metre swimming pool, a multipurpose sports hall, a gym, a lift, toilets and changing rooms. The Sports facilities are also shared with Sha Tin College although the building is not physically connected to the Sha Tin College campus. The new block also houses the new library, the staff room, classrooms for Years 4-6, the conference room, secret room and Mandarin rooms. There has also been a building works that was completed in 2012.

==Pupil Council==

The Pupil Council is the main student body in Sha Tin Junior School and the school principals and teachers use this way to communicate with students through Representatives. Pupil Council members and representatives are chosen in each class by a vote. The Members then have to come to meetings with teachers every 2 weeks to discuss issues facing students and problems around the school. Then the Council will discuss with Teachers to come up with a course of action. Students are told they can express any problem to their classes Council rep. 
Over the years the student council has changed in many ways, the biggest change happened between the 2008-2009 school year and the 2009-2010 school year. Before 2009-2010  the student council only had Representatives from classes in Years 4-6, but now all years and classes are included in the pupil council. 
The pupil council has done many things to change the way to school runs and raises money. Many things included posters to remind people to watch their behavior as well as other small things to make the school a better place. The Pupil council also organized many things to raise money for charity. For Example the 2010 Haiti earthquake. The school council organized to have the words "SJS Helps Haiti" using coins, and the coins were then donated to charities helping the Haiti earthquake relief. They also sold wristbands to raise money for Haiti.

==See also==

==External links==


