[[Sticky Fingers (restaurant)]]

CATEGORIES: Restaurants in South Carolina, Economy of the Southeastern United States, Regional restaurant chains in the United States, Restaurants established in 1992, Barbecue restaurants

Sticky Fingers RibHouse (also known as Sticky Fingers) is a restaurant chain located in the southeastern United States specializing in Memphis Style Barbecue. The restaurant is not affiliated with the London based restaurant of the same name,http://www.stickyfingers.co.uk/ owned by Rolling Stones member Bill Wyman. Sticky Fingers was started by three high school friends in 1992. The first store opened in Mount Pleasant, South Carolina and the company has grown to include 15 stores in Georgia, Florida, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee.

==History==

Sticky Fingers was founded by lifelong friends Jeff Goldstein, Todd Eischeid, and Chad Walldorf who met in seventh grade in Chattanooga, Tennessee.  The three friends went their separate ways after high school, each attending a different college.  After college Jeff moved to Memphis to work for his father at the famous Public Eye restaurant where he gained a love for ribs and barbecue.   Jeff's parents then moved to Charleston, South Carolina where they complained there was no good barbecue.  Jeff proceeded to contact Todd and Chad who were busy being ski bums in Colorado and ask them how they felt about opening a restaurant in Charleston.  The three opened the first Sticky Fingers in the Charleston suburb of Mt. Pleasant. Originally Jeff ran the kitchen, Chad was on the floor, and Todd did the accounting and helped where he was needed.  The three rotated jobs every six months.
July 10, 2002 
Red, Hot & Blue Alleges Trade Secrets Stolen 
The Red Hot & Blue restaurant chain filed a lawsuit in Arlington County Circuit Court against Gary Price, its former vice president, and Sticky Fingers Restaurant Group. The suit accuses Price of proffering confidential company information to win a job offer. It also alleges that Sticky Fingers actively sought and now possesses trade secrets—specifically, recipes—that might cost Red Hot & Blue's franchised and company-owned eateries business. [tpl]Citation needed|date=September 2009[/tpl]
Complicating the sorting out of stolen-recipe claims is a connection both chains have to Memphis, Tenn.-based Corky's Old-Fashioned Bar-B-Q, an 18-unit chain with restaurants in five states. At Red Hot & Blue's founding, the chain had an agreement to use Corky's recipes. But before that, according to Walldorf, Corky's was owned by Sticky Fingers co-founder Jeff Goldstein's father, who also operated another Memphis barbecue, The Public Eye."  Herb Goldstein had sold his interest and came to Charleston to help us get Sticky Fingers going," Walldorf said.
December 12, 2002 
Barbecue Restaurant Chain Drops Suit against Charleston, S.C.-Based Rival 
Red Hot & Blue Inc., based in Arlington, Va., dismissed the lawsuit it filed earlier against Sticky Fingers and former Red Hot & Blue executive Gary Price.
2006 
Chain investor Quad-C buys Sticky Fingers stake 
In another indication that private-equity firms are eager to invest in smaller restaurant companies, Charlottesville, Va.-based Quad-C Management bought an undisclosed stake in Sticky Fingers Corp.
2008 
Sticky Fingers ended its partnership with Quad-C in 2008. Quad-C is no longer affiliated with Sticky Fingers RibHouse.
2009 
Sticky Fingers closes four locations (Hixson, TN; Columbia, SC; Hilton Head, SC; North Charleston, SC). Company also moves the restaurant headquarters' from a [tpl]convert|6500|sqft|m2|adj=on[/tpl] office in Mount Pleasant to a smaller new [tpl]convert|3500|sqft|m2|adj=on[/tpl] office site.
2010 
September 5, 2010
Sticky Fingers closes in Wilmington,NC.
September 6, 2010
Sticky Fingers headquarters moving to Atlanta, GA 
Frank Sbordone, chief executive officer of Sticky RibHouse LLC, said that the move puts them closer to its Southeastern scattering of restaurants. 
"We needed better access to our current markets," he said. "Our new headquarters offers proximity to major expressways and the Atlanta airport, and is also convenient for the majority of our Atlanta-based administrative and restaurant support team. In addition, we believe metro Atlanta presents a great opportunity for future restaurant growth."
2011 
April 2011
Sticky Fingers closes in Atlantic Beach, FL
Sale of Sticky Fingers Smokehouse Restaurants and BBQ 
Sauce Business 
Brookwood Associates has advised Sticky Ribhouse, LLC 
(“Sticky Fingers”) on the sale of the Company’s restaurant operations to a newly formed entity, 
Sticky Fingers Restaurants, LLC, and the sale of the retail barbecue sauce distribution business 
to Ken’s Foods, Inc. Sticky Fingers operates 16 restaurants in five southeastern states and is a 
premier source of Memphis-style ribs, barbecue, and sauces. The Company also has a dynamic 
retail sauce distribution business, selling through grocery chains and big box retailers such as 
Wal-Mart. The brand enjoys a loyal following in the Southeast and widespread distribution of 
its proprietary sauces. 
Brookwood’s broad marketing process maximized the value of the Company by separately 
identifying the most logical buyers for the restaurants and retail sauce business. This 
transaction underscores Brookwood’s deep knowledge of the restaurant and food distribution 
industries, and yielded a favorable outcome for this unique barbecue concept. 
About Sticky Fingers Restaurants, LLC: Sticky Fingers Restaurants, LLC is a newly formed 
entity created to acquire the 16 Sticky Fingers restaurants. The entity is managed by RJD 
Management, LLC which also manages Red, Hot and Blue, a 27 unit casual barbecue restaurant 
chain specializing in “Barbecue, Burgers and Blues.” The company is based in Winston-Salem, 
NC, and operates or franchises restaurants in 7 states, primarily in the Mid-Atlantic region. 
About Ken’s Foods, Inc: Ken’s Foods, Inc. is one of the largest producers and distributors of 
dressings and sauces, offering products under its namesake brand as well as other brands 
through exclusive licensing agreements. The company produces and packages over 400 
varieties of dressings and sauces, sold through both retail grocery stores and professional food 
service channels. The company is based in Marlborough, MA. 
About Brookwood Associates: Brookwood Associates is a leading independently-owned 
investment bank serving middle-market companies. The firm offers merger, acquisition, 
corporate financing, restructuring, fairness opinion and other related advisory services to clients 
across several sectors, including but not limited to franchisee brands, restaurants and specialty 
retail industries

==Restaurant==

The ambiance of the restaurant can be described as nostalgic. In order to accent the Memphis Style Barbecue, blues music is played and pictures of various famous blues artists and instruments associated with blues music such as guitars and basses.  The boothes are made of dark stained 2x4 and plywood benches.  A framed copy of The Rolling Stones album Sticky Fingers hangs near the bar in every restaurant.  The table set up includes a new setup of the sauces and a happy hour menu.

==Menu==

Sticky Fingers specializes in Memphis-style barbecue, using St. Louis cut spare-ribs that are hickory smoked in every store. Sticky Fingers also serves various pulled pork and rotisserie chicken dishes (both of which are also hickory smoked in store) along with salads and desserts. Sticky Fingers exclusive flavor comes from its smoking process and five signature sauces:
The entrance to each Sticky Fingers has pictures of the various famous guests that have visited Sticky Fingers.:Sticky Fingers

==Citations==

Sticky Fingers Smokehouse—How we started http://www.stickyfingersonline.com/howstarted.asp

Sticky Fingers Smokehouse—Famous Customers http://www.stickyfingersonline.com/famouscustomers.asp

==References==

==External links==


