[[FACSys]]

CATEGORIES: Communication software

FACSys is a network-based fax messaging gateway.  It was originally developed by Optus Software in 1987 and first introduced to the local area network marketplace in 1990.  Version 3.1 became widely accepted - especially in the Novell Netware market.  In 1995 the company introduced the first fax server (FACSys 4.01a) for the Microsoft NT platform.
emFAST Inc. has developed an extensive pre- and post-sales support program for the FACSys Fax Messaging Gateway, the F.A.S.T. (FACSys Authorized Support Team) program that eventually encompassed worldwide support and distribution of FACSys. 
On July 1, 2004. emFAST Inc. acquired the FACSys Intellectual Property .  Since that, subsequent versions of the FACSys Fax Messaging Gateway (FACSys 5), based on the Microsoft SQL platform have been introduced.
The latest FACSys developments include integrations with business software systems such as Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), Customer Relationship Management (CRM) and mail delivery systems.  FACSys also integrates with popular office equipment such as network scanners and multi-function printers (MFPs) from a variety of well-known manufacturers.  FACSys also supports Fax-over IP (FoIP).

==About fax server technology==

A fax server is a collection of software modules which allow users to send and receive fax messages directly from their desktop from email and/or document workflow applications. A fax server is equipped with either a hardware-based fax card or a software emulator, based on the T.38 protocol to send faxes over Internet Protocol (IP). Users are able to communicate with the fax server either on a Local Area Network (LAN) or over the Internet. Organizations tend to use a fax server to benefit from both an operational cost perspective (i.e., phone lines, supplies, maintenance) and a human resource perspective (i.e., travel to and from the fax machine, as well as prolonged waiting periods at the physical device). A fax server permits organizations to maintain an audit trail of all of the fax transactions, hence enables compliancy with legislations and mandates, such as Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX). An argument can also be made that because faxing via fax servers is a paperless solution, it innately allows organizations in their goal to be environment-friendly, by reducing their overall carbon footprint.

