[[Zafrul Aziz]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Malaysian businesspeople, Malaysian Malay people, Malaysian Muslims, Malaysian television personalities, Malaysian bloggers, 1973 births

YM Tengku Dato’ Zafrul Aziz bin Tengku Abdul Aziz is the Chief Executive Officer of CIMB Investment Bank, the largest Asia Pacific (ex-Japan) - based investment bank, under CIMB Group. Zafrul joined CIMB on 2 January 2014 and serves as the Head of CIMB Group's Investment Banking Division as well as Co-Head of the Corporate Clients Solution Division, CIMB Group's corporate sales and marketing division.
Zafrul is the President of the Kuala Lumpur Business Club and sits on the Board of Malaysian Investment Development Authority (MIDA), Malaysia's primary agency for manufacturing and services sector promotion and Perbadanan PR1MA Malaysia which focuses on property development for middle income households. He also sits on the board of CIMB Investment Bank Berhad and Cagamas Berhad as well as a member of the Advisory Board to the Faculty of Business and Accounting, University Malaya. His most recent appointments are Chairman of Enactus (formerly known as SIFE) Malaysia, a non-profit organisation aimed at grooming university students into future leaders. Zafrul was also in the panel of judges in the corporate reality television series The Firm.
Zafrul has three children (daughters, Tengku Zahra Jasmina and Tengku Zahira Eusnie and son, Tengku Zaeem Khalif), and is married to Raja Datin Johanna Arshad.

==Early life and Education==

Zafrul was born on 25 June 1973 and is the eldest of four siblings. His mother is Raja Datuk Zaharaton Raja Zainal Abidin, former Director-General of the Economic Planning Unit (EPU) of the Prime Minister's Department of Malaysia, and his father, Tengku Abdul Aziz, is a businessman.
Zafrul, graduated from the University of Bristol, UK with a BSc (Hons) in Economics and Accounting and completed his Masters degree in University of Exeter, UK.

==Career History==

Zafrul started out as a corporate finance executive in AmInvestment Bank. He then joined Crédit Agricole as an investment analyst, moving up to Director within a few years. Succeeding this, he became the Advisor to the President of Tenaga Nasional Berhad. Zafrul then joined CIMB Investment banking, after which he was appointed as Group Managing Director of Avenue Capital Resources (now ECM Libra), a listed company specialising in financial services i.e. investment banking and fund management. He was also Chief Executive Officer of Avenue Securities and the Chairman of Avenue Asset Management. 
Zafrul then went on to become the Head of Investment Banking for Citigroup Malaysia. Subsequently, he was the CEO and substantial shareholder of Tune Money Sdn Bhd (Tune Money). Following that, Zafrul was appointed as Group Director of Kenanga Holdings Berhad and Director of Kenanga Investment Bank Berhad. Prior to assuming his most recent role with CIMB, Zafrul was the Chief Executive Officer of Maybank Investment Bank, the fully owned investment banking arm of Maybank, Malaysia's flagship financial services player. The acquisition of Kim Eng Holdings Limited (Kim Eng) by the Maybank Group in 2011 resulted in the combined entity of Maybank IB and Kim Eng, known regionally as Maybank Kim Eng, of which Zafrul was also CEO.

==The Firm==

Zafrul was one of the judges of the corporate reality television series The Firm. The show premièred prime time nationwide on ntv7 and Astro's Channel 7 in Malaysia in 2007. As one of the three millionaire judges on The Firm, the other two being Peter Pek and Chan Boon Yong, he is considered one of Malaysia's few corporate celebrities. He has also appeared in advertisements for Tune Money.

==References==

==External links==


