[[Minnesota v. Dickerson]]

CATEGORIES: United States Supreme Court cases, United States Fourth Amendment case law, 1993 in United States case law

Minnesota v. Dickerson, 508 U.S. 366 (1993),508 U.S. 366 Full text of the opinion courtesy of Findlaw.com. was a 1993 Supreme Court of the United States case. Decided June 7, 1993, the Court unanimously held that, when a police officer who is conducting a lawful patdown search for weapons feels something that plainly is contraband, the object may be seized even though it is not a weapon.  By a 6-to-3 vote, however, the court held that the officer in this case had gone beyond the limits of a lawful patdown search before he could determine that the object was contraband, making the search and the subsequent seizure unlawful under the Fourth Amendment. 
Associate Justice Byron White gave the opinion of the court.

==Background==

Dickerson was in a known drug area. An officer investigated by ordering a patdown of Mr. Dickerson to search for any weapons. During that search, he felt a small lump in his coat. Without further evidence, he reached in and grabbed the lump and found it was cocaine. In lower court, defendant Dickerson moved that the cocaine be suppressed as evidence because the officer violated his right against unreasonable search and seizure under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.

==Ruling of the Courts==

The Minnesota Court of Appeals reversed. In affirming, the state Supreme Court held that both the stop and the frisk of respondent were valid under Terry v. Ohio, 392 U. S. 1, but found the seizure of the cocaine to be unconstitutional. Refusing to enlarge the "plain-view" exception to the Fourth Amendment's warrant requirement, the court appeared to adopt a categorical rule barring the seizure of any contraband detected by an officer through the sense of touch during a patdown search. The court further noted that, even if it recognized such a "plain-feel" exception, the search in this case would not qualify because it went far beyond what is permissible under Terry.
MINNESOTA v. DICKERSON 508 U.S. 366 - US Supreme Court Cases from Justia & Oyez
The U.S. Supreme Court unanimously agreed that the cocaine in this case was inadmissible as evidence even though the Court held that officers were allowed to assume that an object was contraband through touch.MINNESOTA v. DICKERSON 508 U.S. 366 - US Supreme Court Cases from Justia & Oyez

==References==


