[[Imagistic]]

CATEGORIES: Internet companies of the United States, Web design companies, Web applications, Technology companies, Consulting firms, Information technology consulting firms, Privately held companies based in California, Companies based in California

Imagistic is a business technology consulting and Internet software development company located in Westlake Village, California. Core services include business technology consulting, business technology strategy, technology forensics, RFP/RFI/RFQ consultation, internet software development, web development, custom applications, content strategy, and creative services.

==Awards/Contributions==

In 2011, imagistic, through their new annual program Grantastic, awarded a $15,000 grant for web services to the Innocence Project of New Orleans. The grant enables the organization to receive a new web site and content strategy.
In 2010, imagistic won an American Business Award for the TeamLogic IT site, was a finalist for three other awards, including one for the imagistic site in the Business Services Category. Also in 2010, imagistic won three awards for Interactive Excellence through the 16th Annual Communicator Awards, for clients Network for Good, Elev8 Kids, and 1928 Jewelry Company.
imagistic merited nine awards over the course of 2009, including two WebAwards, one for Outstanding Website for imagistic and another for the Entertainment Standard of Excellence for Hollywood.com. From the Interactive Media Awards, the company merited three Outstanding Achievement Awards for clients Network for Good, Fuller Theological Seminary, and First 5 LA. In addition, imagistic won four Davey Awards: Silver Awards for imagistic, Fuller Theological Seminary, and Family Promise. As well, they won a Gold Award for their work on Hollywood.com.
In 2008, imagistic was named a 2008 American Business Awards finalist in the categories of overall Web design and software programming and Web design for First 5 LA and Technicolor. This same year, imagistic also won the Ektron All-Star Award for the Fuller Theological Seminary site.
In both 2002 and 2004, imagistic won the Webby Award for its work with Teaching Tolerance. Company co-founder Michael Weiss was quoted on BNET as saying: "The Internet as a means to distribute information is truly remarkable. Unfortunately, not all that information is positive or humanitarian. We are extremely proud to be working with an organization whose mission it is to use the Internet to promote understanding, diversity and acceptance of others.""Southern Poverty Law Center and imagistic to Help Teachers Increase Tolerance and Fight Hate With Enhanced Teaching Tolerance.org Site", BNET "Business Wire" section. Retrieved on 2008-06-06.
The firm has also won multiple EMMA awards.

==History==

The company was founded by Kevin Howard Goldberg, Michael Weiss, and Marcelo Ziperovich in 1997, as the Internet boom was beginning its rise.
After operating out of one of the founder's second bedroom for six months, the company obtained office space on Abbot Kinney Boulevard in Venice, California. For eight years, imagistic rose and fell with the Internet boom and bust.
During its boom, Los Angeles Business Journal"Growth Leaders Pace Market by Staying With Basics - Los Angeles Business Journal's top five companies - Statistical Data Included", Los Angeles Business Journal, BNET. Retrieved on 2008-06-06. named imagistic #4 of the top 100 fastest-growing private companies. After the company had reached thirty employees in 2001, the industry fell to pieces. In 2005, after two rounds layoffs and Ziperovich's departure, Goldberg and Weiss relocated the company.Sylvie Belmond, Imagistic Internet firm comes to Westlake Village, The Acorn Newspaper, Published on 2005-02-09.
Now located in Westlake Village, California, imagistic maintains partnerships with Web content management companies CrownPeak, Ektron, Microsoft, and PaperThin.
As Owner/Technology Strategist at imagistic, Kevin Howard Goldberg has been spearheading the company's proprietary Business Technology Plan using the technorational process since 1997. In the fall of 2008, Kevin Howard Goldberg's book, XML: Visual QuickStart Guide (2nd Edition), was published by Peachpit Press. The first edition of the book was written by Elizabeth Castro. In January 2010, Kevin authored an article for IBM developerWorks about CodeIgniter (an open source PHP MVC Framework) titled "Developing dynamic Web sites with CodeIgniter".Kevin Howard Goldberg, Developing dynamic Web sites with CodeIgniter, IBM developerWorks, Published on 2010-01-12. In May 2010, Kevin wrote another article for IBM developerWorks, titled "CodeIgniter and Ajax using JQuery".Kevin Howard Goldberg, CodeIgniter and Ajax using JQuery, IBM developerworks, Published on 2010-05-11.  In the fall of 2010, Kevin will serve as instructor for an introductory course on programming concepts through eClasses.org.
As a frequent judge for the Stevie Awards and speaker at annual seminars held at the Nonprofit Technology Network Conference, Michael Weiss is frequently quoted on the topic of Web development. In 2006, he was quoted in BusinessWeekKaren E. Klein, An Online Business for $3,000, BusinessWeek. Retrieved on 2008-05-08. on the benefits of hiring a Web developer. He has also been quoted in the L.A. Times, Chicago Times, CXO News, and WebProNews. He regularly contributes to his company's blog.

==References==

==External links==


