[[Spotted Green Pigeon]]

CATEGORIES: Caloenas, Bird extinctions since 1500, Collection of the World Museum, Controversial bird taxa, Animals described in 1789, Extinct birds

The Spotted Green Pigeon (Caloenas maculata), also known as the Liverpool Pigeon, is a presumed extinct pigeon species of unknown provenance.Fuller, 2000, p. 174–175 It is currently known only from a single specimen reposited in the World Museum of the National Museums Liverpool; this specimen is presumed to have been collected from French Polynesia (possibly Tahiti) sometime between 1783 and 1823.Gibbs et al., 2001

==Description==

The Spotted Green Pigeon was first mentioned in the work A General Synopsis of Birds (1783) by John Latham and scientifically named by Johann Friedrich Gmelin in 1789. It reached a size of 32 centimetres. The wing length was 175 mm, the tail length was 126 mm, the culmen was 20 mm and the tarsus was measured with 33 mm. The plumage was deep bottle green. The neck was characterized by elongated feathers. The wing and back feathers were spangled cream coloured. The terminal band of the tail was cream coloured too. Legs and feet were reddish. On the base of the beak was a knob. The Liverpool Pigeon had short rounded wings. On basis of the elongated neck feathers John Latham assumed a relationship with the Nicobar Pigeon and Lord Rothschild regarded it as just an aberrant specimen of the Nicobar Pigeon. It was probably due to Rothschild's influence that the Liverpool Pigeon was often overlooked by subsequent authors. Notwithstanding the Liverpool Pigeon was very different from the Nicobar Pigeon.

==Status==

The provenance and the reasons for its extinction remain unknown. Scientists have hypothesized that this species lived on an island with no main predators, owing to its small wings. It is also possible that it lived in forest, due to its mottled green colouration. Ornithologist David Gibbs also hypothesized that this bird might have collected on a Pacific island, due to stories told by Tahitian islanders in 1928 about a mysterious green and white spotted bird called titi, which might well have been about this pigeon. However, paleontologist David Steadman revised this hypothesis and stated that the name titi is used for several bird species in French Polynesia, in particular for the procellariids.Steadman, 2001 In 1851, a juvenile specimen came into the museum collection of the Earl of Derby in Knowsley Hall which is now on display in the World Museum Liverpool. A second specimen which was collected between 1783 and 1823 is lost. BirdLife International added the Liverpool Pigeon to the list of extinct bird species in 2008.BirdLife International Whats new (2008)

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==


