[[Awards and decorations of the Illinois National Guard]]

CATEGORIES: Military in Illinois, Awards and decorations of the United States National Guard

The current order of precedence for Illinois National Guard awards is found in NGIL 600-8-22 (3 Sept 2010). The following list represents the appropriate order of precedence for Illinois awards. This applies to service members of both the Army and Air National Guard.
1. Illinois Military Medal for Valor
2. Illinois Military Distinguished Service Medal
3. Illinois Military Medal for Merit
4. Illinois Cross Medal (pending)
5. Abraham Lincoln Medal of Freedom
6. Illinois Long and Honorable Military Service Medal
7. Illinois Recruiting Ribbon
8. Illinois Military Attendance Ribbon
9. Illinois State Active Duty Ribbon
10. Illinois Outstanding Service Award
11. Illinois Distinguished Service Award
Awards and decorations of the Illinois National Guard are provided to honor the service and dedication of the men and women who serve in the Illinois Army National Guard and the Illinois Air National Guard.

==Illinois Military Long and Honorable Service Medal==

The Illinois Military Long and Honorable Service Medal is awarded by the State of Illinois to the Army and Air National Guard members assigned to the Illinois Military Department for 5 consecutive years of honorable service.

==Illinois Military Attendance Ribbon==

The Illinois Military Attendance Ribbon is awarded by the State of Illinois to the Army and Air National Guard members assigned to the Illinois Military Department for 2 years of attendance for Drill, Annual Training and other duties as determined by the Adjutant General. Member must have attended at least 75% of scheduled UTA training as well as Annual Training for the timeframe awarded.

==Illinois State Active Duty Service Ribbon==

The Illinois State Active Duty Service Ribbon is awarded by the State of Illinois to the Army and Air National Guard members assigned to the Illinois Military Department for state activation and mobilization.

