[[Jesse Boyd]]

CATEGORIES: 1958 births, American jazz double-bassists, Musicians from North Carolina, Loyola University New Orleans, People from Greenville, North Carolina, Living people

Jesse Boyd (born May 20, 1958) is an American Jazz bassist, session musician and music educator.

==Biography==

Jesse Boyd was born in Greenville, North Carolina. Boyd's skills for improvisation had their roots in Church, where his father was a minister. At the age of 12 years, Jesse recorded his first album with his family. The same year he also recorded several other gospel albums. At age 18, he moved to Los Angeles, where he discovered the possibilities of rock and played with many touring bands. Back in New Orleans, he went back to a more acoustic sound and started to play upright bass again. Not only did he return to play Jazz, but also Classical music. During his time as an undergraduate in Loyola University New Orleans he studied with Betsy Heston. He studied with Bill Huntington and Ellis Marsalis at University of New Orleans, where he obtained a Master's degree in Jazz Studies.
Currently he is a professor at Loyola University New Orleans, both in the Jazz and Music Industry departments. He performs regularly with Charmaine Neville, Ingrid Lucia, Leah Chase, Bob French, Michael Pellera, Al Belletto, Ellis Marsalis, Topsy Chapman, and Larry Sieberth to name just a few. He also spent several years performing as a member of Jeremy Davenport’s band.

==Discography==

Jesse Boyd has also kept busy as an in-demand studio bassist. Recent recordings include two complete albums with Ingrid Lucia. The first was only Ingrid and John Fohl (Dr. John’s guitarist) and Jesse on bass. The latter was a live recording with Ingrid’s full band (Don't Stop, CD). Another forthcoming CD is with pianist Michael Pellera and drummer Joe Dyson. "True Stories" is the name of Boyd's Debut CD, produced by Andrea Gomez in 2008. It features only original compositions for jazz trio. Michael Pellera (piano) and Troy Davis (drums) were the sidemen for True Stories.

==External links==


