[[Korean influence on Japanese culture]]

CATEGORIES: Japanese culture, Korean culture, Asian culture

The Korean influence on Japanese culture refers to the cultural influence of Korea upon Japanese culture.  As Korean Peninsula was the cultural bridge between Japan and the Asian continent through much of history, it is inevitable and well-documented that at various times this influence would be felt in various aspects of Japanese culture.  This influence was reflected most notably in the introduction of Buddhism to Japan from India via the Korean Kingdom of Baekje. Influence from Korea can also be seen in Japanese painting and architecture, ranging from the design of Buddhist temples to various smaller objects such as statues, textiles and ceramics.Jon Carter Covell, 1986

==Art==

During the Asuka Period, the artisans from Baekje provided technological and aesthetic guidance in the Japanese architecture and arts. Therefore, the temple plans, architectural forms, and iconography were strongly influenced directly by examples in the ancient Korea.Donald F. McCallum. The Four Great Temples: Buddhist Archaeology, Architecture, and Icons of Seventh-Century Japan. University of Hawai'i Press, 2009Neeraj Gautam. Buddha his life and teaching. Mahaveer & Sons, 2009 In deed, many of the Japanese temples at that time were crafted in the Baekje style.Donald William Mitchell. Buddhism: introducing the Buddhist experience. Oxford University Press, 2008 Japanese nobility, wishing to take advantage of culture from across the sea, [tpl]Citation needed span|text=imported artists and artisans from the Korean Peninsula (most, but not all, from Baekje) to build and decorate their first palaces and temples.|date=June 2011[/tpl]
Among the oldest crafted items extant in Japan is the Tamamushi shrine, a magnificent example of Northern Qi Chinese art of that period.Uehara Kazu Professor of Seijo University "Production documented age of Tamamushi shrine " http://www.seijo.ac.jp/pdf/falit/028/028-04.pdfC.J. Ryan. Art in China and Japan. New Century Corp., 1914[tpl]cite book |author=Fenollosa, Ernest F |title=Epochs of Chinese and Japanese Art: An Outline History of East Asiatic Design |publisher=Heinemann |year=1912 | page=49[/tpl] The shrine is a miniature two-story temple made of wood, to be used as a kind of reliquary. This shrine is so named because it was decorated with wings of the Yamato Tamamushi (jewel beetle) Yamato Tamamushi found in the Japanese Archipelago (excluding Hokkaido and the Okinawa Islands).[tpl]cite book |title=Asuka Buddhist Art: Horyuji |author=Mizuno Seiichi |publisher=Weatherhill |year=1974 |pages=40–52[/tpl][tpl]cite book |title=Japanese Art |author=Stanley-Baker, Joan |publisher=Thames & Hudson |year=1984 |pages=32 |isbn=978-0-500-20192-3[/tpl] This accessorization by wings of tamamushi beetles set into metal edging was also practiced in the kingdoms of Korea.[tpl]cite book |title=古代美術工芸品に応用せられし「タマムシ」に関する研究 |trans_title=Kodaibijutsukougeihin ni Oyo Sareshi "Tamamushi" ni Kansuru Knekyu: Research was applied to the ancient arts and crafts on the "jewel beetle" |language=Japanese |author=Uehara Kazu |year=1932 |pages=50[/tpl]Mizuno, Seiichi. Asuka Buddhist Art: Hōryū-ji. Weatherhill, 1974. New YorkStanley-Baker, Joan. Japanese Art. Thames & Hudson, 1984 Conrad Schirokauer,Miranda Brown,David Lurie,Suzanne Gay. A Brief History of Chinese and Japanese Civilizations. Wadworth engage Learning, 2003Paine, Robert Treat; Soper, Alexander Coburn. The Art and Architecture of Japan. Yale University Press, 1981. pp. 33-35, 316. Sources indicate that this technique of tamamushi inlay is native to Korea.Beatrix von Ragué. A history of Japanese lacquerwork. University of Toronto Press, 1976 The shrine's ornamental gilt bronze openwork, inlaid with the iridescent wings of the tamamushi beetle, is of a Korean type.Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York, N.Y.), James C. Y. Watt, Barbara Brennan Ford. East Asian lacquer: the Florence and Herbert Irving collection. Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1991

===Architecture===

The oldest Japanese Buddhist temple, Asuka-dera, constructed by craftsmen from the ancient Korean kingdom of Baekje in 588, was modeled upon the layout and architecture of Baekje.Herbert E. Plutschow. Historical Nara: with illustrations and guide maps. Japan Times, 1983Kakichi Suzuki. Early Buddhist architecture in Japan. Kodansha International, 1980 And one of the early great temples in Japan, such as the Shitennō-ji Temple was based on types from the ancient Korea.Asoke Kumar Bhattacharyya. Indian contribution to the development of Far Eastern Buddhist iconography. K.P. Bagchi & Co., 2002Louis Frédéric. Japan Encyclopedia. Harvard University Press, 2002
In 601, Prince Shōtoku began the construction of his palace, the first building in Japan to have a tiled roof. Next to it he built his temple, which became known as Hōryū-ji. He employed a number of skilled craftsmen, monks, and designers from Baekje for this project.Nishi and Hozumi Kazuo. What is Japanese Architecture? Shokokusha Publishing Company, 1983. Tokyo The temple became his personal devotional center where he studied with Buddhist priests Hyeja and Damjing from the Korean kingdom of Goguryeo; it also housed people who practiced medicine, medical knowledge being another by-product of Buddhism. Next to the temple there were dormitories which housed student-monks and teacher-monks.http://www.onmarkproductions.com/html/shotoku-taishi.html Mark Schumacher. A to Z Photo Dictionary of Japanese Buddhist Statuary.
The first Horyu-ji burned to the ground in 670. It was rebuilt, and although it is thought to be smaller than the original temple, Horyu-ji today is much the same in design as the one originally built by Shotoku. Again, the temple was rebuilt by artists and artisans from Baekje. The bracket work of a Baekje gilt bronze pagoda matches the Hōryū-ji bracket work exactly.Shin, Young-hoon. "Audio/Slide Program for Use in Korean Studies, ARCHITECTURE". Indiana University. The wooden pagoda at Horyu-ji, as well as the Golden Hall, are thought to be masterpieces of seventh-century Baekje architecture. Two other temples, Hokki-ji and Horin-ji, were also probably built by artisans of Korea’s Baekje kingdom.http://www.onmarkproductions.com/html/asuka-art.html Mark Schumacher. A to Z Photo Dictionary of Japanese Buddhist Statuary.

===Sculptures===

One of the most famous of all Buddhist sculptures from the Asuka period found in Japan today is the "Kudara Kannon" which, when translated, means "Baekje Guanyin."(Kudara is the Japanese name for BaekjePeter C. Swann. A concise history of Japanese art. Kodansha International, 1979) This wooden statue was either brought from Korean Baekje or carved by a Korean immigrant sculptor from Baekje.Peter C. Swann. The art of Japan, from the Jōmon to the Tokugawa period. Crown Publishers, 1966Ananda W. P. Gurugé. Buddhism, the religion and its culture. M. Seshachalam, 1975Jane Portal. Korea: art and archaeology. British Museum, 2000 Ernest Fenollosa, American scholar of Asian cultures, describes the Kudara Kannon as “the supreme master piece of Corean creation”.Fenollosa, Ernest F. Epochs of Chinese and Japanese Art: An Outline History of East Asiatic Design. Heinemann, 1912 It formerly stood as the central figure in the Golden Hall at the Horyu-ji. [tpl]Citation needed span|text=It was moved to a glass case in the Treasure Museum after a fire destroyed part of the Golden Hall in 1949.|date=April 2010[/tpl]  "This tall, slender, graceful figure made from camphor wood is reflective of the most genteel state in the Three Kingdoms period. From the openwork crown to the lotus pedestal design, the statue marks the superior workmanship of 7th century Paekche artists."Jon Carter Covell 1986, p. 58. The first and foremost clue that clearly indicates Baekje handiwork is the crown's design, which shows the characteristic honeysuckle-lotus pattern found in artifacts buried in the tomb of King Munyong of Baekje (reigned 501-523). The number of protrusions from the petals is identical, and the coiling of the vines appears to be the same. Crowns of a nearly identical type remain in Korea, executed in both gilt bronze and granite. The crown's pendants indicate a carryover from shamanist designs seen in fifth-century Korean crowns. [tpl]Citation needed span|text=Guanyin's bronze bracelets and those of the Four Heavenly Kings at the Golden Hall also show signs of similar openwork metal techniques.|date=April 2010[/tpl]
The another Hōryū-ji statue, "Guze Kannon" is made of gilded wood in the Korean style.Evelyn McCune. The arts of Korea: an illustrated history. C. E. Tuttle Co., 1962 The Kannon retains most of its gilt. It is in superb condition because it was kept in the Dream Hall(Yumedono) and wrapped in five hundred meters of cloth and never viewed in sunlight. The statue which had originally come from BaekjeAsiatic Society of Japan. Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan. The Society, 1986 and was held to be sacred and had remained unseen until it was unwrapped at the demand of Ernest Fenollosa, who was charged by the Japanese government to catalogue the art of the state and later became a curator at the Boston Museum.June Kinoshita. "Gateway to Japan", pp. 587-588. Kodansha International, 1998 Fenellosa also considered the Kannon to be Korean. According to the record Shogeishō (聖冏抄), a compilation of the ancient historical records and traditions about the Japanese Prince Regent Shotoku Taishi, which was written by a Japanese monk Shogei (1341-1420), the 7th Patriarchs of the Jodo sect, Guze Kannon is a statue that is the representation of King Seong of Baekje, which was carved under the order of the subsequent King Wideok of Baekje.聖冏抄 ... 故威德王恋慕父王状所造顕之尊像 即救世観音像是也
More examples of Korea's influence were noted in the New York Times, whose reporter writes when looking at Japan's national treasures like the "Hokan Miroku" sculpture which came from SillaAsia, Volume 2. Asia Society, 1979 and has been preserved at Kōryū-ji Temple ; "It is also a symbol of Japan itself and an embodiment of qualities often used to define Japanese-ness in art: formal simplicity and emotional serenity. To see it was to have an instant Japanese experience. I had mine. As it turns out, though, the Koryuji sculpture isn't Japanese at all. Based on Korean prototypes, it was almost certainly carved in Korea"NYT (2003): Japanese Art and "The obvious upshot of the show's detective work is to establish that certain classic "Japanese" pieces are actually "Korean".
In the 8th century, groups of Sculptors of Baekje and Silla origins participated in the construction works of Tōdai-ji Temple.Jirô Sugiyama, Samuel Crowell Morse. Classic Buddhist sculpture: the Tempyô period. Kodansha International, 1982 The bronze statue of Great Buddha at Tōdai-ji Temple was predominantly made by Koreans.College Art Association of America. Conference. Abstracts of papers delivered in art history sessions: Annual meeting. The Association, 1998 The Great Buddha project was supervised by a Korean Baekje craftsman, Gongmaryeo (or Kimimaro in Japanese) and had many Silla craftsmen from Korea working from the beginning of the project. The Great Buddha was finally cast, despite great difficulty by virtue of the skill of imported craftsmen from Silla in 752.Richard D. McBride. Domesticating the Dharma: Buddhist Cults and the Hwaŏm Synthesis in Silla Korea. University of Hawaii Press, 2008 Furthermore, Silla sculpture seems to have exerted considerable influence on the styles of the early Heian period in Japan.

===Painting===

In 588, The painter's Baekga (白加) was in the member of the craftsman whom Baekje presented to the Japanese emperor,Nihon-shoki (Emperor Sushun age) and in 610 the Korean priest Damjing came to Japan from Goguryeo and taught the Japanese the technique of preparing pigments and painting materials.Bernard Samuel Myers. Encyclopedia of world art. McGraw-Hill, 1959Terukazu Akiyama. Japanese painting. Skira, 1977
In the 15th century, facing slavery and persecution as neo-Confucianism took a stronger hold during the Joseon Dynasty in Korea, many Buddhist-sympathetic artists began migrating to Japan. Once in Japan, they continued to use their Buddhist names instead of their birth (given) names, which eventually led to their origins being largely forgotten. These artists eventually married native women and raised children who were oblivious to their historical origins.Jon Carter Covell 1986, p. 99. Many famous artists in Japan fall into this category.

==Technique==

Various metal-working techniques such as iron-working, the cuirass, the oven, bronze bells used in Yayoi period Japan essentially originated in Korea.Farris, William Wayne. Sacred Texts and Buried Treasures: Issues in the Historical Archaeology of Ancient Japan. University of Hawaii Press, 1998 During the Kofun period, in the fifth century, large groups of craftspeople, who became the specialist gold workers, saddlers, weavers, and others arrived in Yamato Japan from the Baekje kingdom of Korea.Brian M. Fagan. The Oxford companion to archaeology. Oxford University Press, 1996Japan. Bunkachō, Japan Society (New York, N.Y.), IBM Gallery of Science and Art. The Rise of a great tradition: Japanese archaeological ceramics of the Jōmon through Heian periods (10,500 BC-AD 1185). Agency for Cultural Affairs, Government of Japan, 1990

===Iron ware===

Iron processing and sword making techniques in ancient Japan can be traced back to Korea.
"Early, as well as current Japanese official history cover up much of this evidence. For example, there is an iron sword in the Shrine of the Puyo Rock Deity in Asuka, Japan which is the third most important historical Shinto shrine. This sword which is inaccessible to the public has a Korean Shamanstic shape and is inscribed with Chinese characters of gold, which include a date corresponding to 369 A.D. At the time, only the most educated elite in the Paekche Kingdom knew this style of Chinese writing"
"Inariyama sword, as well as some other swords discovered in Japan, utilized the Korean 'Idu' system of writing."  The swords "originated in Paekche and that the kings named in their inscriptions represent Paekche kings rather than Japanese kings."  The techniques for making these swords were the same styles from Korea.Harmon, R. B.(2007)

===Pottery and porcelain===

Yayoi pottery derived from Final Jomon wares under the influence of the Korean Plain Pottery tradition.Mark Hudson. Ruins of Identity: Ethnogenesis in the Japanese Islands. University of Hawaii Press, 1999 Two basic kiln types — both still in use — were employed in Japan by this time. The bank, or climbing, kiln, of Korean origin, is built into the slope of a mountain, with as many as 20 chambers; firing can take up to two weeks. In the updraft, or bottle, kiln, a wood fire at the mouth of a covered trench fires the pots, which are in a circular-walled chamber at the end of the fire trench; the top is covered except for a hole to let the smoke escape.
In the 17th century CE, Koreans brought the art of porcelain to Japan.Emmanuel Cooper, 10,000 Years of Pottery, 2010, University of Pennsylvania Press, p.79 Korean potters also established the Karatsu, Arita, Satsuma, Hagi, Takatori, Agano and Yatsushiro kilns in Japan.http://www.washingtonocg.org/news/2010_02.asp News - Washington Oriental Ceramic Group (WOCG) : Newsletter [tpl]quote|In Japan Korean potters were given land and soon created new, advanced kilns in Kyushu -- Karatsu, Satsuma, Hagi, Takatori, Agano and Yatsushiro.[/tpl]The Met, Muromachi period [tpl]quote|1596 Toyotomi Hideyoshi invades Korea for the second time. In addition to brutal killing and widespread destruction, large numbers of Korean craftsmen are abducted and transported to Japan. Skillful Korean potters play a crucial role in establishing such new pottery types as Satsuma, Arita, and Hagi ware in Japan. The invasion ends with the sudden death of Hideyoshi.[/tpl]

====Satsuma ware====

It is documented that during Hideyoshi's invasions of Korea (1592–1598) Japanese forces abducted a number of Korean craftsmen and artisans, among them a disputed number of potters. Some sources claim only a few,Purple Tigress, blog post others claim many more. Regardless of the number, it is undisputed that at least some Korean potters were forcibly taken to Japan from Korea during the invasions, and that it is the descendants of these potters who produced Satsuma ware.New York Times (1901), paragraph 1

===Shipbuilding===

The ancient Japanese learned shipbuilding techniques under the direction of Korean engineers from the kingdom of Silla.Dorothy Perkins. Japanese history and culture, from abacus to zori. Facts on File, 1991Nihon Yunesuko Kokunai Iinkai. Japan: its land, people and culture. Print. Bureau, Ministry of Finance, 1964 An immigrant group 'the Inabe', closely associated with shipbuilding, was made up of carpenters who had come to Japan from Silla.Michael Como. Shōtoku: Ethnicity, Ritual, and Violence in the Japanese Buddhist Tradition. Oxford University Press, 2008Michael Como. Weaving and Binding: Immigrant Gods and Female Immortals in Ancient Japan. University of Hawaii Press, 2009Asahi Shinbunsha, Kenzō Tange, Noboru Kawazoe. Ise, prototype of Japanese architecture. M.I.T. Press, 1965
In the 9th century, conditions of sea travel from Japan to Tang dynasty of China improved because the relations with Unified Silla were now such that Japanese could take advantage of Korean ships, which were better built and better handled than their own.George Sansom, Sir George Bailey Sansom. A History of Japan to 1334. Stanford University Press, 1958 Evidently, the Ennin's Diary suggests that Koreans were active in the international trade in the late Silla period and were considered the best sailors with the best ships of the day.Mark Peterson, Phillip Margulies (2010) referencing Edwin O. Reischauer. Ennin’s Diary: The record of Pilgrimage to China in Search the Law. New York: Ronald Press, 1955Australia. Commonwealth Office of Education. Hemisphere, Volume 26. Commonwealth Office of Education, 1981 The monk Ennin noted Sillan vessels not only in a Japanese harbor or traversing the Yellow Sea but also carrying cargoes of charcoal from Shandong to Shuzhou within China.Pratapaditya Pal, Julia Meech, Julia Meech-Pekarik. Buddhist book illuminations. Ravi Kumar Publishers, 1988Patricia Buckley Ebrey, Anne Walthall, James Palais. East Asia: A Cultural, Social, and Political History. Wadworth cengage Learning, 2009  At this time, the Japanese also recognized the superiority of Korean shipbuilding, as we know of the Japanese envoys as well as student monks preferred to abandon their Japanese ships by obtaining ships constructed from Silla and also from orders sent in 839 by the Japanese court instructing Kyushu that the new ship should be built to the specifications of Silla Ships to stand up the storms.Zhenping Wang. Ambassadors from the Islands of Immortals: China-Japan Relations in the Han-Tang period. University of Hawaii Press, 2005

===Navigation===

Ancient Koreans were commercially active throughout East Asia, and their mastery of navigation allowed them to pursue trade interests as far away as the East Indies.Louis D. Hayes. Political Systems of East Asia: China, Korea, and Japan. M.E. Sharpe, 2012 In 526, a Baekje Korean monk Gyeomik traveled to India via the southern sea route and mastered Sanskrit, specializing in Vinaya studies. He came back with a collection of Vinaya texts to Baekje, accompanied by the Indian monk Paedalta(Vedatta).Robert E. Buswell. Tracing Back the Radiance: Chinul's Korean Way of Zen. University of Hawaii Press, 1983 During the later Silla, whence students traveled to Tang China in ships guided by the mariner's compass, in order to gain the knowledge of Chinese ethics and philosophy.A cyclopedia of education. The MacMillan Company, 1918
In the 9th century, Japanese had not mastered the skill and knowledge necessary for safe ocean navigation in their part of the world.Edwin O. Reischauer. Ennin's travels in Tʻang China. Ronald Press Company, 1955 Consequently, the Japanese monk-traveler Ennin tended to rely on the Korean sailors and traders on his travels, at the time when the men of Silla were the master of the seas achieving Korean maritime dominance in eastern Asia.Edwin O. Reischauer. Ennin’s Diary: The rocord of Pilgrimage to China in Search the Law. New York: Ronald Press, 1955The McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of World Biography: An International Reference Work, Volume 2. McGraw-Hill, 1973William Theodore De Bary. Sources Of East Asian Tradition: Premodern Asia, Volume 1. Columbia University Press, 2008 The monk Ennin’s crossing to China on Japanese vessels and the whole catastrophic maritime record of the mission contrast sharply with the speed and efficiency with which Sillan ships quickly brought him back home to Japan. Another indication of the gap in navigation skill between the Sillans and Japanese at this time was the employment by the Japanese embassy of 60 Korean helmsmen and sailors to help get the main party safely home.

====Maritime trade====

It seems that commerce between East China, Korea and Japan was, for the most part, in the hands of men from Silla, accompanied by Silla Korean hegemony over the maritime commerce of East Asia.Moshe Y. Sachs. Worldmark encyclopedia of the nations, Volume 1. Worldmark Press, 1971 Here in the relatively dangerous waters on the eastern fringes of the world, the Koreans performed the same functions as did the traders of the calm Mediterranean on the western fringes.
The Shōsōin is a great Japanese reservoir of the Oriental art of the 7th and 8th centuries when the art and culture of Asia reached the height of its development.Jirō Harada. The Shōsōin: an eighth century repository. Mayuyama, 1950 Among the Shōsōin treasures at Todai-ji in Nara there are more than 20 sheets of purchase orders (one dated as early as 752), indicating that the favorite luxury goods they imported from Korean Silla included perfume, medicine, cosmetics, fabric dying materials, metallic goods, musical instruments, carpets, and measuring tools.Catalogue of the Exhibition of Shoso-in Treasures. Nara National Museum of Japan, 2002  Some were made in Silla; Others were of foreign origin, probably from Southeast Asia, India or South Asia.

===Fortifications===

Japanese archaeologists refer to Ono Fortress, Ki Fortress, and the rest as Korean-style fortresses. Because of their close resemblance to the structures built on the peninsula during the same general period. The resemblance is not coincidental. The individuals credited by Chronicles of Japan for building the fortress were all former subjects of the ancient Korean Baekje Kingdom.Bruce Loyd Batten. Gateway to Japan: Hakata in War And Peace, 500-1300. University of Hawaii Press, 2006 Especially throughout Tenji period, Japanese appears to have favored Baekje fortification experts from the immigrant kinship groups, putting their superior technical skills to use in fortifying Japan against a possible foreign invasion.

===Movable type printing===

Though the Jesuits operated a Western movable type printing-press in Nagasaki, Japan, printing equipmentLane, Richard (1978). "Images of the Floating World." Old Saybrook, CT: Konecky & Konecky. P. 33. with many Korean technicians and their fonts brought back by Toyotomi Hideyoshi's army in 1593 from Korea to Japan was starting of its own movable-type printing.Joseph Needham,Tsien Tsuen-Hsuin. Science and Civilisation in China: Volume 5, Chemistry and Chemical Technology. Cambridge University Press, 1985 That same year, a Korean printing press with movable type was sent as a present for the Japanese Emperor Go-Yōzei. The emperor commanded that it be used to print an edition of the Confucian Kobun Kokyo (Classic of Filial Piety).Donald Keene. Japanese Literature of the Pre-Modern Era, 1600-1867. Grove Press: distributed by Random House, 1978 Four years later in 1597, a Japanese version of the Korean printing press was built with wooden instead of metal type, and in 1599 this press was used to print the Nihon Shoki (Chronicles of Japan).

==Science==

During the reign of the Japanese emperor Kimmei, a Korean physician and several kinds of medicines were sent from Baekje to Japan to help avert the dread disease.Mircea Eliade, Charles J. Adams. The Encyclopedia of religion, Volume 9. Macmillan, 1987  Baekje buddhist priest and physicianEncyclopaedia of Asian civilizations, Volume 3. L. Frédéric, 1977 Gwalleuk came in the reign of the Japanese Empress Suiko, and brought books on astronomy, geography and calendrical science, which led to use of the calendar in Japan,Monumenta Nipponica, Volume 54. Sophia University(Jōchi Daigaku), 1999 whereupon students were chosen to be educated in these sciences. He also taught medicine to the young students selected by the Japanese imperial court.John Z. Bowers. Medical education in Japan: from Chinese medicine to western medicine. Hoeber, 1965

==Music==

In the field of Korean and Japanese music history, it is well known that ancient Korea influenced ancient music of Japan.Vadime Elisseeff. The Silk Roads: Highways of Culture and Commerce. UNESCO, 2000 Since the 5th century, musicians from Korea visited Japan with their music and instruments.Liv Lande. Innovating Musical Tradition in Japan: Negotiating Transmission, Identity, and Creativity in the Sawai Koto School. University of California, 2007 Komagaku, literally "music of Korea", refers to the various types of Japanese court music derived from the Three Kingdoms of Korea and northern Korean state of Balhae,Benito Ortolani, Japanese theater in the world. Japan Foundation, 1997 later classified collectively as Komagaku.Denis Arnold. Oxford Companions Series The New Oxford Companion to Music. Oxford University Press, 1983 It is made up of purely instrumental music with wind- and stringed instruments(became obsolete), and music which is accompanied by mask dance. Today, Komagaku survives only as dance accompaniment and is not usually performed separately by the Japanese Imperial Household.University of California, Los Angeles. Festival of Oriental music and the related arts. Institute of Ethnomusicology, 1973

===Instruments===

As early as the 5th century the Kudaragoto, which resembles the western harp, had been introduced from Baekje to Japan along with Korean music. It has twenty three strings, and was designed to be played in an upright position.Charles A. Pomeroy. Traditional crafts of Japan. Walker/Weatherhill, 1968 And the 12-string long zither Shiragigoto was introduced as early as 5th or 6th century from Silla to Japan. However, today, the two instruments has fallen out of use by traditional music performers.
Some instruments in traditional Japanese music originated in Korea: Komabue is a six-hole traverse flute of Korean origin.William P. Malm. Traditional Japanese Music and Musical Instruments. Kodansha International, 2000 It is used to perform Komagaku and Azuma asobiBen no Naishi, Shirley Yumiko Hulvey, Kōsuke Tamai. Sacred rites in moonlight. East Asia Program Cornell University, 2005(chants and dances, accompanied by an ensemble pieces). San-no-tsuzumi is an hourglass-shaped drum of Korean origin.Shawn Bender, Taiko Boom: Japanese Drumming in Place and Motion. University of California Press, 2012 The drum has two heads, which are struck using a single stick. It is played only in Komagaku.

==Literature==

Literary scholars such as Susumu Nakanishi have speculated that Yamanoue no Okura, a well-regarded Man'yōshū poet, may have been an immigrant from the kingdom of Baekje.Nakanishi, Susumu (ed.) 1985. Man'yōshū-jiten. p. 280.
Since World War II, there have been numerous Zainichi Korean writers of Japanese.Hideo Levy 2010. The World in Japanese. Stanford University.

==Religion==

During the Asuka Period of Japan, scholars and monks from the Korean kingdom of Baekje served both as teachers and as advisers to Japan's rulers. In 552, King Seong of Baekje introduced to Japan a laudatory memorial consisting of the teachings of Buddhism, an image of Shaka Butsu in gold and copper and several volumes of the "Sutras".Jon Carter Covell 1986, pp. 44-45 After the initial entrance of some craftsmen, scholars, and artisans from Baekje, Emperor Kimmei requested Korean men who were skilled in divination, calendar making, medicine and literature.Jon Carter Covell 1986, p. 46. During the 6th century, Soga Umako went to great lengths to promote Buddhism in Japan with the help of the Goguryeo, Baekje, and Silla kingdoms of ancient Korea.Jon Carter Covell 1986, p. 47.

==Writing systems==

Jindai moji, "the god age script," was claimed by a Shinto scholar in the 13th century that Japan had had its own system of writing before the introduction of Chinese characters, and this idea was taken up by several scholars of nationalists persuasion in the Tokugawa period who produced samples of the script to support their claims.Peter Francis Kornicki. The Book in Japan: A Cultural History from the Beginnings to the Nineteenth Century. Brill Publishers, 1998 The discoveries of many varieties oí Jindai moji, during the late Tokugawa period, were forgeries done by Kokugaku scholars, who were feeling embarraced about adopting and adapting scripts from other cultures and unwilling to acknowledge that writing was one of the many of cultural appurtenances for which Japan was at first dependent on China and Korea.Insup Taylor, Maurice Martin Taylor. Writing and Literacy in Chinese, Korean, and Japanese. John Benjamins Publishing Company, 1995 Ironically, several Jindai moji, modeled on the Korean alphabet Hangul, are identical in shape and sound values to their Hangul models, and others are distorted versions.

==Imperial family==

According to the [tpl]Nihongo|Shoku Nihongi|続日本紀[/tpl], Takano no Niigasa, background of the naturalized clansmen [tpl]Nihongo|Yamato-no-Fumito|和史[/tpl], was a 10th-generation descendant of King Muryeong of Baekje who was chosen as a concubine for Emperor Kōnin and subsequently became the mother of Emperor Kammu.[tpl]cite news|last=Watts|first=Jonathan|title=The Emperor's New Roots|url=http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2001/dec/28/japan.worlddispatch|accessdate=2012-06-11|newspaper=The Guardian|date=Dec 28, 2001|quote = "I, on my part, feel a certain kinship with Korea, given the fact that it is recorded in the Chronicles of Japan that the mother of Emperor Kammu was of the line of King Muryong of Paekche," Akihito told reporters.[/tpl] It has been theorized that the Japanese imperial line has Korean ancestry. As reported in National Geographic, Walter Edwards, professor of Japanese studies at Tenri University in Nara, states that "Blood links between Korea and the Japanese imperial family are documented from the eighth century. Even the current emperor Akihito has said that he has Korean ancestry." http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2008/04/080428-ancient-tomb.html Tony McNicol. Japanese Royal Tomb Opened to Scholars for First Time. National Geographic News, 2008 Since 1976, foreign archaeologists have been requesting access to the Gosashi tomb which is supposed to be the resting place of Emperor Jingu, but these requests have been denied. In 2008, Japan gave foreign archaeologists limited access to the site, but without allowing any excavation. As National Geographic wrote, Japan "has kept access to the tombs restricted, prompting rumors that officials fear excavation would reveal bloodline links between the "pure" imperial family and Korea"

==See also==

==Notes==

==References==


