[[Cilento and Vallo di Diano National Park]]

CATEGORIES: Cilento, National parks of Italy, Parks in Campania, World Heritage Sites in Italy, 1991 establishments in Italy

The Cilento and Vallo di Diano National Park (Italian : Parco Nazionale del Cilento e Vallo di Diano, acronym PNCV) is an Italian national park founded in 1991. Situated in the Province of Salerno (Campania), it includes great part of the geographical regions of Cilento and Vallo di Diano.

==History==

The park was officially instituted on December 6, 1991 to protect the territory of Cilento from building speculation and mass tourism. In 1998 it becomes a World Heritage Site of UNESCO,Info on whc.unesco.org also with the ancient Greek towns of Paestum, Velia and the Padula Municipality not included in the park but part of Vallo di Diano region Charterhouse. 
The other natural reserves instituted in the area of the park are the "Natural reserve of Foce Sele-Tanagro" (created in 1993,Reserve's page on parks.it with the Oasis of Persano) and the "Maritime reserve of Punta Licosa", in the municipality of Castellabate.

==Geography==

The national park's territory, one of the greatests in Italy, not includes all the municipalities of the areas of Cilento and Vallo di Diano. It includes almost all the Cilentan Coast and its central forest area is Pruno. The administrative offices are located in Vallo della Lucania, at Piazza Santa Caterina nr. 8.
The municipalities part of the park are: Agropoli, Aquara, Ascea, Auletta, Bellosguardo, Buonabitacolo, Camerota, Campora, Cannalonga, Capaccio-Paestum, Casalbuono, Casal Velino, Casaletto Spartano, Caselle in Pittari, Castel San Lorenzo, Castelcivita, Castellabate, Castelnuovo Cilento, Celle di Bulgheria, Centola, Ceraso, Cicerale, Controne, Corleto Monforte, Cuccaro Vetere, Felitto, Futani, Gioi, Giungano, Laureana Cilento, Laurino, Laurito, Lustra, Magliano Vetere, Moio della Civitella, Montano Antilia, Montecorice, Monteforte Cilento, Monte San Giacomo, Montesano sulla Marcellana, Morigerati, Novi Velia, Ogliastro Cilento, Omignano, Orria, Ottati, Perdifumo, Perito, Petina, Piaggine, Pisciotta, Polla, Pollica, Postiglione, Prignano Cilento, Roccadaspide, Roccagloriosa, Rofrano, Roscigno, Sacco, Salento, San Giovanni a Piro, San Mauro Cilento, San Mauro la Bruca, San Pietro al Tanagro, San Rufo, Santa Marina, Sant'Angelo a Fasanella, Sant'Arsenio, Sanza, Sassano, Serramezzana, Sessa Cilento, Sicignano degli Alburni, Stella Cilento, Stio, Teggiano, Torre Orsaia, Torchiara, Tortorella, Trentinara, Valle dell'Angelo and Vallo della Lucania.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


