[[Peter Wildeblood]]

CATEGORIES: 1923 births, 1999 deaths, Alumni of Trinity College, Oxford, British journalists, Canadian people of British descent, English dramatists and playwrights, LGBT dramatists and playwrights, LGBT journalists from Canada, LGBT writers from Canada, LGBT writers from England

Peter Wildeblood (19 May 1923 – 14 November 1999) was an Anglo-Canadian journalist, novelist, playwright and gay rights campaigner. He was one of the first men in the UK to publicly declare his homosexuality.

==Career==

Peter Wildeblood was born in Alassio, on the Italian Riviera, in 1923. He was the only child of Henry Seddon Wildeblood (b. 1863), a retired engineer from the Indian Public Works Department, and his much younger second wife, Winifred Isabel, née Evans, the daughter of a sheep rancher in Argentina. He was brought up in his parents' cottage near Ashdown Forest.Matthew Parris, ‘Wildeblood, Peter (1923–1999)’, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, Sept 2004; online edn, May 2006 accessed 21 June 2010 His mother was considerably younger than his father, and Wildeblood later wondered if the fact had affected his development.
Wildeblood won a scholarship to Radley College and then went up to Trinity College, Oxford in 1941, but dropped out after ten days because of ill health. Soon afterwards he  volunteered for the Royal Air Force and trained as a pilot in Southern Rhodesia. However, after a series of crashes he was grounded and instead became an RAF meteorologist, remaining in Southern Rhodesia for the rest of the War.William H, Honan "Peter Wildeblood, 76, Writer Who Fought Britain's Laws Against Homosexuality", New York Times, 21 November 1999 After demobilisation, he resumed his place at Trinity College where he gravitated towards a homosexual circle in the theatre and arts.http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/obituary-peter-wildeblood-1128482.html Obituary: Peter Wildeblood in The Independent 25 November 1999
After Oxford Wildeblood turned to journalism, writing for the Daily Mail's regional office in Leeds, then in Fleet Street itself, first as the royal correspondent, then as its diplomatic correspondent. At this time Wildeblood began a passionate affair with an RAF corporal called Edward McNally and wrote him a series of passionate love letters. It was these letters which proved a crucial part of the evidence leading to Wildeblood's later conviction for conspiracy to incite acts of gross indecency.
In the summer of 1953, Lord Montagu of Beaulieu had offered Wildeblood the use of a beach hut near his country estate. Wildeblood brought with him two young RAF servicemen, his lover Edward McNally and John Reynolds. The foursome were joined by Montagu's cousin Michael Pitt-Rivers. At the subsequent trial the two airmen turned Queen's Evidence, and claimed there had been dancing and 'abandoned behaviour' at the gathering. Wildeblood said it had in fact been 'extremely dull'. Montagu claims that it was all remarkably innocent, saying: 'We had some drinks, we danced, we kissed, that's all.'http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-468385/Lord-Montagu-court-case-ended-legal-persecution-homosexuals.html 'Lord Montagu on the court case which ended the legal persecution of homosexuals' Daily Mail 17 July 2007
Arrested on 9 January 1954, in March of that year Wildeblood was brought before the British courts charged with 'conspiracy to incite certain male persons to commit serious offences with male persons' (or 'buggery').Peter Wildeblood Against the Law, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1999 pp.50–52 Wildeblood was charged along with Lord Montagu and Michael Pitt-Rivers, and during the course of the trial he admitted his homosexuality to the court.[ref]
