[[Holger Henke]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, Living people, People from Viersen, International relations scholars, Political science writers, German expatriates in the United States, German political scientists

Holger Wilhelm Henke (* 25 September 1960 in Viersen (North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany) is a political scientist and works as assistant provost at York College, City University of New York.York College staff Holger Henke  He has previously taught as a professor (assistant professor, 2004–08; associate professor, 2008) at Metropolitan College of New York.  He also was the Assistant Director of the Caribbean Research Center (Medgar Evers College).

==Life==

Holger Henke grew up in Viersen and since 1972 in Haar (Munich). He attended the Geschwister-Scholl-Institute for Political Science at the University of Munich, where he obtained a Magister Artium (Political Science, Modern German Literature, and Communication Sciences) in 1987. He subsequently emigrated and lived for seven years in Jamaica. In 1996 he earned a Ph.D. in Government at the University of the West Indies (Mona (Jamaika) with a dissertation about the foreign relations of that country between 1972 und 1989. Since 1995 he lives near New York City.

==Work==

Henke studies international relations (Caribbean, Europe, USA, und Asia), migration, political culture and development (political economy).  He has published six books and numerous scholarly articles. Henke is the editor of the peer-reviewed journal Wadabagei: A Journal of the Caribbean and its Diasporas. In 2010-11 he served as President of the Caribbean Studies Association.  Henke is also a Senior Fellow of the Caribbean Research Center at Medgar Evers College (City University of New York), where he previously had worked as assistant director, and (until 2012) a Senior Research Fellow of the  Council on Hemispheric Affairs in Washington (D.C.).  In August 2010, he received the honorary citizenship of Jamaica.  Since 2011 he provides annual country reports for several Caribbean nations to the Washington-based think tank Freedom House.  In 2013 Henke received a Fulbright International Education Administrators (US-UK) Award.

==Books==

==References==


