[[Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency]]

CATEGORIES: Dirk Gently, 1987 novels, 1980s fantasy novels, 1980s science fiction novels, Comedy novels, British science fiction novels, Novels by Douglas Adams, Novels set in Cambridge, Time travel novels, University of Cambridge in fiction, Novels about music, Heinemann (publisher) books

Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency is a humorous detective novel by Douglas Adams, first published in 1987. It is described by the author on its cover as a "thumping good detective-ghost-horror-who dunnit-time travel-romantic-musical-comedy-epic".
The book was followed by a sequel, The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul. The only recurring major characters are the eponymous Gently, his secretary Janice Pearce and Sergeant Gilks.  Adams also began work on another novel, The Salmon of Doubt with the intention of publishing it as the third book in the series, but died before completing it.
A BBC Radio adaptation starring Harry Enfield was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in October 2007.  A second series based on the sequel was broadcast on October 2008. A 2010 television adaptation by Howard Overman for BBC Four borrowed some of the characters and some minor plot elements of the novel to create a new story.

==Writing==

The genesis of the novel was in two Doctor Who serials written by Adams, City of Death, (in which an alien tries to change history at the cost of erasing humanity from existence), and in particular the cancelled serial Shada, which first introduces a Cambridge professor called Chronotis who is hundreds of years old. He has been living and working at a Cambridge college for centuries, apparently attracting no attention (noting with appreciation that the porters are very discreet). In Shada, Chronotis's longevity is due to him being a Time Lord, and his time machine is an early model TARDIS. These trademark elements from Doctor Who were removed by Adams for Dirk Gently. Shada, which never aired due to a production strike terminating its filming, was later released on VHS with Tom Baker narrating the unfilmed segments, and later completed as a webcast with Paul McGann as the Eighth Doctor and John Leeson as K9.The Official Doctor Who Website
A number of elements in the novel were inspired by Adams' time at university. For example, one plot thread involves moving a sofa which is irreversibly stuck on the staircase to Richard's apartment; according to his simulations, not only is it impossible to remove it, but there is no way for it to have got into that position in the first place. In a similar incident that occurred while Douglas Adams attended St John's College, Cambridge, furniture was placed in the rooms overlooking the river in Third Court while the staircases were being refurbished. When the staircases were completed, it was discovered that the sofas could no longer be removed from the rooms, and the sofas remained in those rooms for several decades. 
The South Bank Show revealed that Adams based Chronotis' rooms on the rooms he occupied in his third year at university. Likewise, Richard's room – filled with Macintosh computers and synthesisers – was based on Adams' own flat (visited and photographed by Hi-Fi Choice Magazine). The piece of music by Bach that is heard aboard the satellite is "Ach bleib bei uns, Herr Jesu Christ" from the cantata "Bleib bei uns, denn es will Abend werden", BWV 6 (also an organ chorale BWV 649). Adams stated that this was his personal "absolutely perfect" piece of music, and that he listened to it "over and over; drove my wife completely insane" while writing Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency.Interview with M. Throsby, ABC Classic FM, 1999, 17 May 2001 (repeat)

==Plot summary==

In the book the plot emerges in a fragmented way, with shifting points of view and events that seem out of order.  As presented, it shows Richard MacDuff avoiding his boss by going to the Coleridge dinner at his old college, and witnessing his former tutor, Prof. Chronotis, perform an inexplicable magic trick where he makes a cruet disappear and then finds it again by smashing an ancient clay pot that a young girl brought to the dinner, having found it on holiday in Greece.  He encounters a horse in the Professor's lodgings, which the Professor is alarmed about but unable to explain.  He returns to his London flat and finds himself doing things that are out of character, including climbing a drainpipe to break into Susan Way's flat to erase an embarrassing message he left on her answering machine.  At that point Dirk Gently intervenes and sets about solving the mystery, even though MacDuff was not aware that there was one.  Interspersed with this are passages describing Gordon Way driving his expensive car to his country home, being killed by the Electric Monk, becoming a ghost and attempting to tell MacDuff something very important.
Four billion years in Earth's past, a group of Salaxalans attempts to populate the Earth; however, a mistake caused by their engineer – who used an Electric Monk to irrationally believe the proposed fix would work – causes their landing craft to explode, killing the Salaxalans and generating the spark of energy needed to start the process of life on Earth. The ghost of the Salaxalan engineer roams the earth waiting to undo his mistake, watching human life develop and waiting to find a soul that it can possess. The ghost finds it can only possess individuals that fundamentally want to do the same task it is trying to accomplish itself. Otherwise, it is only able to influence the individual in subtle ways. 
In the early 19th century, the ghost discovers Samuel Taylor Coleridge. 
Although we appear to be in our reality, we are in fact in a parallel universe in which Coleridge's laudanum fuelled dreaming of "Kubla Khan" has not been disturbed by the man from Porlock. The ghost influences the writer to inspire "Kubla Khan" and  "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner" to describe the accident, the evolution of life on Earth and how to correct the problem that destroyed the landing craft in the distant past. 
The ghost begins seeking out someone whose hardship can be influenced by Coleridge's work when it becomes apparent to him that Coleridge himself is too 'relaxed' on laudanum to be useful to him. It later discovers that Professor Urban "Reg" Chronotis at St Cedd's possesses a time machine disguised as his quarters. In the late 20th century, during the annual St Cedd's dinner reading of "Kubla Khan", the ghost influences Reg to use the time machine to perform a bit of trickery for a young child at the dinner, while the ghost lures another Electric Monk into Reg's quarters. Upon return to the present, the ghost finds the Monk unusable for its purposes. The Monk then goes off to kill Wayforward Technologies II's CEO, Gordon Way, due to a misunderstanding. 
The ghost later tries to influence Richard MacDuff, a former student of Reg and current employee of Gordon Way, who was also at the Coleridge reading. Richard finds himself breaking into the apartment of Susan Way—his girlfriend and Gordon's sister— to erase an answering machine message. His actions lead the police to consider Richard a suspect in the murder of Gordon. Richard discusses this with his former college friend Dirk Gently, who claims to be a "Holistic Detective" believing in the "fundamental interconnectedness of all things". Currently on the case of a missing cat, Dirk examines Richard and finds him to have been in a hypnotic-like state, and determines that Richard was temporarily possessed. Richard recounts the events from the Coleridge reading, including Reg's trick; Dirk, after consulting with a child, concludes that the only way the trick was possible was with a time machine. The two approach Reg, who admits to this fact.
Meanwhile, the ghost has found Michael Wenton-Weakes, a recently-fired editor of an arts magazine. Through subtle influences the ghost makes Michael read Coleridge's works and convinces him to kill Albert Ross, the editor who replaced him. Both now have sought to erase those that supplant them, and the ghost is able to fully possess Michael's body. The ghost, in Michael's body, arrives at Reg's quarters while Dirk and Richard are there, and demands Reg use his time machine to return to the period of the Salaxalan crash. They travel back, and ghost-possessed Michael, using a makeshift environmental suit, sets up to repair the damage to the Salaxalan craft.  While they watch, Richard receives a call from Susan from the 20th century on Reg's phone, a quirk of the time machine due to the phone company. Richard learns of Ross's murder, and Dirk quickly surmises the ghost's plan, which if successful will erase the formation of life on Earth. Realising Michael was influenced by Coleridge's works, Dirk instructs Reg to take them to the 19th century, allowing Dirk to interrupt Coleridge long enough to disrupt the ghost's possession and prevent the full version of "Kubla Khan" from ever having been written and leaving us only with Coleridge's half remembered fragment - thus bringing the novel's universe into line with our own.
Upon arrival back in the 20th century, Dirk, Richard, and Reg find humanity as they expect it but with very small, subtle changes. Reg also discovers his time machine no longer functions, after having the telephone company repair the phone line to his quarters. Dirk learns that the missing cat was never missing in the first place as a result of their actions, and sends his client a revised bill that reads, "To: saving human race from total extinction - no charge."

==Characters in Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency==

==Major themes==

The central motif of Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency is the fundamental interconnectedness of all things. Many details may appear superfluous, but turn out to be integral to the plot, such as a sofa belonging to Richard that has somehow become trapped on his staircase. Its position is such that it not only cannot be removed intact (eventually being sawed apart by the police), but also apparently could not have arrived there in the first place. The situation is ultimately explained by the time machine's arrival at the staircase wall three weeks in the past, when the sofa was being delivered; Dirk opened the door to help the delivery men get it up the stairs, but the machine departed before they could finish maneuvering around the corner. Chaos theory, in its accessible form popularised by writers such as James Gleick, also figures prominently in the novel.
The novel's title mentions the idea of holism. There are quantum mechanics references as well; phenomena of non-locality, as in the EPR paradox, make appearances, and the concept of Schrödinger's Cat plays a part in helping Dirk determine Richard's mental state, Richard producing clear and rational arguments for why the experiment proposed in the theory cannot be carried out in reality.
The story also mocks the corporate world with both the software called Anthem, which converts spreadsheets to pleasant music, and another package called Reason, which inverts the idea of a decision-making program.  Instead of proceeding from ideas and logic to a decision, it takes a decision that has already been made and creates a reasoned justification for it.  However instead of selling it to corporations, Gordon Way secretly sold the software to the American government to be used in justifying its policies.

==Literary significance and reception==

Reviewing the book for The Times, John Nicholson wrote it was "endearingly dotty", but doubted its commercial potential.[tpl]cite news|title=Books: Plot thin but jolly jokes - Review of recent fiction|date=June 18, 1987|first=John|last=Nicholson|publisher=The Times[/tpl]  Austin MacCurtain of the Sunday Times reviewed the paperback edition in 1988, saying that it was "more of the same" as Hitchhiker's, and that the "cosmic romp is stretched thin at times but will not disappoint fans".[tpl]cite news|date=June 26, 1988|title=Paperbacks reviewed - Books|publisher=The Sunday Times|first=Austin|last=MacCurtain[/tpl]  The book was the 9th highest-selling hardback in the UK in 1987.[tpl]cite news|date=January 3, 1988|publisher=The Sunday Times|title=Arts (Books): BEST SELLERS of 1987[/tpl]
In 1990, the Magill Book Reviews said "The author's whimsical sense of humor and his sense that the universe has many unexplored possibilities will arouse the interest of a wide readership."[tpl]cite journal|date=1 May 1990|title=Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency|journal=Magill Book Reviews|issn=08907722[/tpl]
This novel caused Adams to become acquainted with the well-known scientist Richard Dawkins. As Dawkins explains, "As soon as I finished it, I turned back to page one and read it straight through again – the only time I have ever done that, and I wrote to tell him so. He replied that he was a fan of my books, and he invited me to his house in London."[ref]
