[[Jim Whitehead (computer scientist)]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute alumni, University of California, Irvine alumni, American computer scientists, University of California, Santa Cruz faculty, American software engineers, Software engineering researchers, Game researchers

E. James Whitehead is Professor and ChairJim Whitehead Page in UCSC CS people directory of Computer Science at the University of California, Santa Cruz, United States.Curriculum Vitae, Jim Whitehead Home Page, University of California, Santa Cruz, USA. He received a BS in Electrical Engineering from the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1989, and a PhD in Information and Computer Science from the University of California, Irvine, in 2000.
Previously, he performed hard, real-time firmware development as a software engineer for Raytheon, 1989–1992. From 1996–2004, Whitehead created and led the Internet Engineering Task Force working group on Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning,J. Whitehead, G. Clemm, J. Reschke, Ed., Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning (WebDAV): Redirect Reference Resources, RFC 4437, The Internet Society, March 2006.Jim Whitehead, WebDAV: Versatile Collaboration Multiprotocol, IEEE Internet Computing,  Volume 9 ,  Issue 1, pages 66–74, January 2005. and is considered the "father" of the WebDAV protocol.[tpl]citation needed|date=September 2009[/tpl] He is author on over 50 peer-reviewed articles on software engineering and hypertext systems, and seven Internet standards (RFC) documents.
Whitehead led the creation of the BS Computer Science: Computer Game Design degree program at UC Santa Cruz, the first game oriented degree program within the University of California system. He is also working with the Expressive Intelligence Studio as an advisor.EIS Home Page
He is the president of the Society for the Advancement of the Science of Digital Games,SASDG Officers the organization that sponsors the Foundations of Digital Games conference series.Foundations of Digital Games

==References==

==External links==


