[[Kamlesh Mehta]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, Living people, Marathi people, Indian table tennis players, Recipients of the Arjuna Award, Commonwealth Games silver medallists for India, Olympic table tennis players of India, Indian sports coaches, Indian bankers, People from Mumbai, Sportspeople from Maharashtra, Asian Games competitors for India

Kamlesh Navinchandra Mehta (born 1 May 1960) is an Indian retired table tennis player.

==Personal life==

Nicknamed Kamu, Kamlesh Mehta was born in Mumbai on 1 May 1960. After primary school at St. Joseph's Wadala branch, he went to R. A. Podar College in Mumbai to graduate in Commerce and then joined  Dena Bank. He is married to the table tennis player from Assam, Monalisa Barua.

==Table tennis career==

Kamlesh was the captain of the Indian team from 1982 to 1989 and was the highest ranked Indian player in Asia, the Commonwealth and the world. He played in the final of the national championships on eleven occasions between 1981 and 1994, winning the title eight times. He was runner-up on three occasions. 
Kamlesh represented India in seven world championships, eight Asian championships, two Asian Games, six Commonwealth Games, four South Asian Federation games, two Olympic Games and many other official and friendly competitions in India and abroad. His best performance came in the SAF Games in 1991 at Colombo where he won seven gold and four silver medals. 
In six competitions at the Commonwealth Games, Kamlesh has won four silver and four bronze medals, the highest tally by an Indian player. He won the World Bank Championship at the Isle of Man (UK) in 1989. He won all four gold medals at the Pentangular International Championships in 1983.

==Awards==

In a career lasting nearly twenty years, Kamlesh Mehta has received numerous awards. The first to come was Maharashtra Government's Shiv Chhatrapati Award in 1979 followed by The Friendship Trophy for being the best player from India at the Asian Championship in Islamabad in 1984. He was twice named the Best Sportsman by the Sports Journalists' Association of Bombay. He was awarded the Arjuna Award in 1985. He was the first Indian to receive the Fair Play Trophy at the Commonwealth Championships, in 1989. Kamlesh was appointed the National Coach in 1998.

==References==


