[[Om Thanvi]]

CATEGORIES: 1957 births, Living people, Indian journalists, Indian newspaper editors, Indian writers from Rajasthan, Journalists from Rajasthan

Om Thanvi Phalodi, Distt. Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India is a writer and editor.
Om Thanvi grew-up in Bikaner and took his post graduation degree in Business Administration from Rajasthan University . He joined mainstream Hindi journalism in 1980 in Jaipur. Currently he is the editor of Jansatta, a newspaper of Indian Express Group published from Delhi. 
He had been Secretary General of Editors Guild of India for two terms as well as Vice President of the South Asia Free Media Association (SAFMA) and member of the National Integration Council, headed by Prime Minister of India. He is on the Advisory Council of the India International Center (IIC), New Delhi.
Before joining Jansatta in Delhi, he had worked in Chandigarh for ten years (1989–1999) as its resident editor. These were the years when Punjab was in the grip of terrorism and all the institutions of democracy, including the press, were under severe attack. Jansatta remained the only major paper that did not succumb to the "Code of Conduct" imposed by the terrorists on press.
Prior to joining Jansatta, Om Thanvi had edited Itwari Patrika (1980–1987), a Hindi literary and cultural weekly and had also worked as editor-in-charge of Rajasthan Patrika in Bikaner (1987–1989), the widely read daily of Rajasthan.
He is known for his social and cultural concerns. He has personally been engaged in theatre, literature and environmental activities. Has keen interest in history and anthropology; particularly in music, cinema, painting, architecture and language. 
25
He writes travelogues and critical essays. His book Muanjodaro, a travelogue tracing remains of the Indus Valley Civilization, was widely acclaimed in the literary circles. 
On birth centenary of S.H. Vatsyayan Ajneya he edited a two-volume anthology of memoirs "Apne Apne Agyey' consisting 100 contributions of writers from Hindi and other languages. 
Om Thanvi is frequently invited by Indian TV channels as a political commentator for his views and comments on Indian politics. Mr Thanvi has been writing a column for Jansatta entitled "Anantar" over the last many years which has a committed readership.
Om Thanvi is a recipient of many awards. He was awarded with Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi Puraskar for Journalism by the President of India. Other awards include Shamsher Samman for Prose, Haldi Ghati Award for journalism and SAARC Literary Award.

==References==

==External links==


