[[Alfredo Mantica]]

CATEGORIES: 1943 births, Living people, People from Rimini, Italian Social Movement politicians, National Alliance (Italy) politicians, The People of Freedom politicians, Brothers of Italy politicians, Senators of the Republic of Italy, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore alumni

Alfredo Mantica (born July 17, 1943 in Rimini) is an Italian politician. He is a member of the National Alliance party (PdL). He became Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs in the cabinet of Silvio Berlusconi on May 12, 2008.Mantica, Alfredo

==Career==

Mantica is married and is the father of two children. He earned a degree in Economics from the Sacro Cuore Catholic University of Milan in 1967. Besides Italian, he is also fluent in French and English.
Mantica was elected to the Senate of the 10th Legislature on the Movimento Sociale Italiano-Destra Nazionale (Italian Social Movement–National Right) Party ticket in 1987 in the Milan 3 constituency. Re-elected to the Senate of the 13th Legislature on 21 April 1996 in the Lombardy 14 constituency (Monza). Re-elected to the Senate of the 14th Legislature on 13 May 2001 in the Lombardy 14 constituency (Monza). Re-elected to the Senate of the 15th Legislature on 9 April 2006 in the Lombardy  constituency. Re-elected to the Senate of the 16th Legislature on 13 April 2008 in the Lombardy constituency.

==Institutional posts and parliamentary activities==

10th Legislature: member of the Italian Social Movement Group, member of the Finance and Treasury Committee and member of the Council for European Community Affairs.
Member of the 10th Standing Committee (Industry, trade, tourism). 
10th and 13th Legislatures: Member of the 5th Standing Committee (Budget). 
10th and 13th Legislatures: Member of the 6th Standing Committee (Finance and Treasury). 
13th Legislature: Acting Vice Chairman of the Alleanza Nazionale (National Alliance) Party.
Chairman of the Consultative Committee of both Houses on tax registry surveillance. 
Member of the Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry into terrorism in Italy and the failure to identify the perpetrators of attacks. 
14th Legislature: Appointed Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (2nd Berlusconi government), with special responsibility for the Mediterranean and Middle East, Africa and Cooperation.
15th Legislature: Member of the 3rd Standing Committee (Foreign Affairs and Emigration)
Vice Chairman of the 3rd Standing Committee (Foreign Affairs and Emigration)
Member of the Special Committee for the protection and promotion of human rights 
16th Legislature: Appointed Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (4th Berlusconi government) 12 May 2008, with special responsibility for bilateral relations with the countries of Europe and the former Soviet countries of Asia and the Caucasus; relations with the institutions of the EU; exercising the presidency of the National Committee for the Promotion of Italian Culture Abroad; general policy regarding Italian communities abroad and their integration and rights; enhancement of the role of Italian business enterprises abroad; and coordination of initiatives aimed at the reinforcement and rationalisation of the consular network.

==Party appointments==

==Duties==

Within the scope of the political directives issued by the Minister, will assist the Minister in matters concerning: 

==References==

==External links==


