[[Brad Feldman]]

CATEGORIES: Association football commentators, American radio sports announcers, American television sports announcers, Living people, 1967 births, People from Hanover, New Hampshire

Brad Feldman is an American television/radio announcer, radio personality, and  broadcasting executive. He is the TV and radio play-by-play announcer for the New England Revolution "Brad Feldman – Head of Soccer TV Production" New England Revolution online, 2010 of Major League Soccer.

==Commentary career==

Feldman was born in Hanover, New Hampshire on April 6, 1967. He attended Massachusetts schools Shady Hill School, located in Cambridge, and Belmont Hill School, situated in Belmont.  After graduating from high school in 1985 he went on to earn his BA from the Johns Hopkins University. He then earned a master’s degree in journalism from Columbia University and in 2009 completed a Masters of Business Administration degree at Northeastern University. After college, he began his career working in television production in Los Angeles, then worked as a print news and sports reporter before moving into sports television production in New York City. Feldman launched his sportscasting career at TV stations in Texas, New York, and New Jersey. 
A TV and radio announcer for the New England Revolution"D.C. United’s Troubles Keep Mounting" Paul Gardner, Soccer America online, August 8, 2010 since 2001, Feldman is the play-by-play voice for the team’s broadcasts."From the Field to the Broadcast Booth" Jeff Lernieux, New England Revolution online, August 27, 2010  He has also provided color analysis and sideline reporting on Revolution telecasts and was a broadcast-team member for the club’s U.S. Open Cup and SuperLiga championship-winning matches. Feldman was an announcer on Sports Radio 850 WEEI for all four Revolution MLS Cup appearances."American Soccer Takes Another Slap in the Face from ESPN" Paul Gardner, Soccer America online, November 24, 2010 
Feldman also works as the Supervising Producer for Kraft Sports Productions' Revolution telecasts on Comcast Sports Net New England and holds the titles of Broadcast Executive and Director of Soccer Broadcasting. He also announced and produced non-MLS soccer telecasts for various international competitions and assists Revolution head coach  Steve Nicol's staff with video and computer scouting. He hosts the online programs “RevsWrap”"In The Net" New England Revolution, Accessed December 8, 2010 and “In the Net”"Revs Wrap" New England Revolution, Accessed December 8, 2010 and hosts the program, "Inside the Revolution" on MyTV New England." 'Inside the Revolution' to Debut on Saturday" October 1, 2010, New England Revolution
Feldman’s experience as an announcer includes four seasons as a play-by-play commentator on ESPN International during which time he announced matches for several top European soccer leagues.  These included Serie A, the Scottish Premier League, La Liga, and the UEFA Champions League. He also announced MLS, USL and college soccer games on Fox Soccer Channel and UEFA Champions League games for Setanta Sports. He began his soccer announcing career as a sideline reporter for the Kansas City Wizards and on telecasts for the Boston Breakers and New York Power of the WUSA. Feldman is a regular guest soccer expert on WEEI on "The Planet Mikey Show" and  "The D.A. Show" 98.5 The Sports Hub."Boston Sports Talk" Brad Feldman podcast, The D.A. Show, October 29, 2010 He also wrote and hosted video blogs for ESPNBoston.com on the 2010 FIFA World Cup."Final Thoughts on the World Cup" Brad Feldman, ESPN Boston, July 13, 2010

==Personal life==

Feldman lives in Massachusetts, is married, and has one daughter."Lexington's Feldman is the voice of the Revs" Doug Hastings, Lexington Minuteman, September 1, 2010 He has served on the advisory boards for Grassroot Soccer and the Kicking & Screening soccer film festival."GRS Research Advisory Council" Grassroots Soccer, Accessed December 8, 2010

==References==

==External links==


