[[Christian Argenti]]

CATEGORIES: 1975 births, Living people, Australian songwriters, Australian male singers, Singers from Melbourne

Christian Argenti (born 3 January 1975) in Fitzroy in Victoria, Australia, is an Australian singer and radio presenter.

==Invertigo==

Argenti rose to prominence as lead singer of Australian band Invertigo who had the Australian ARIA chart hits "Desensitized" (June 2000) and "Chances Are" (November 2000) and the band's only album to date Forum (July 2001).
Invertigo signed a much publicised worldwide recording deal with the Atlantic recording label in the United States in 1999, but after receiving a disappointing response from American radio with "Desensitized" and only moderate success with "Chances Are", were dropped by the label in late 2001.Where Are They Now? - Invertigo, bmusic, August 2005.
Christian Argenti left Invertigo in February 2003 and has worked as a songwriter and session vocalist since, with credits including the soundtrack for the 2006 Australian film BoyTown (starring Mick Molloy and Glenn Robbins) as well as a string of albums for Australian and overseas artists.

==Radio and media==

After a chance encounter with a radio program director at a function in Hobart in early 2007, Argenti was offered the host position of the drive show on Heart 107.3 (formerly Magic). The following day, Argenti debuted on radio and remained in that position until January 2009 when he returned to his home of Melbourne as presenter on sport radio station SEN 1116.
All Night Appetitite.New Host Joins SEN's All Night Appetite, Crocmedia Newsletter, March 2009.
In February 2010, Argenti left SEN 1116 after being poached by Southern Cross Austereo to host the networked talkback show 'Talking Back the Night' which broadcasts to 35 stations nationally.
The radio industry's governing body in Australia acknowledged Argenti's work when it announced him as a finalist in the category of 'Best Talk Presenter' for the Australian Commercial Radio Awards (ACRAS) in 2011 and again in 2012 alongside veterans Neil Mitchell, Ray Hadley, Paul Murray and John Stanley.http://www.commercialradio.com.au/acras/files/uploaded/file/2012%20ACRAs%20Finalists.pdf
Argenti and his radio show can be heard in every state and throughout a significant portion of regional & provincial Australia each weeknight. Argenti has become well known and at times criticised for his opinionated style and the heavy criticism he regularly broadcasts targeting federal politicians & the federal government often referring to them as 'those clowns' or 'buffoons in Canberra'.
In 2012, Argenti has strengthened a personal 'campaign' against political correctness in Australian society in 2012 and what he calls the 'erosion of free speech and plain speaking in this country', which are two of the more noticeable cornerstones of the show.
In 2010 and 2011, Argenti hosted the national drive sports radio show 'The Home Straight' with former AFL player Peter 'Spida' Everitt and former NRL player Scott Sattler on the Southern Cross Austereo 'Localworks' network across Australia. This show however has not returned in 2012.
Argenti remains a regular commentator and analyst on SEN 1116 sport radio station in Melbourne, generally covering football (soccer) and mixed martial arts.

==Personal life==

Christian Argenti is the grandson of Italian immigrant Giacomo Argenti who was a controversial international political activist and prisoner in the 1920s & 1930s.
Christian Argenti is the cousin of leading Australian film screenplay writer and director Jan Sardi.
Christian Argenti is engaged and has a daughter Ava Di Anne Argenti (born 30 August 2009)

==References==


