[[Langtry Manor]]

CATEGORIES: Country houses in Dorset, History of Bournemouth, Buildings and structures in Bournemouth

The Langtry Manor (formerly The Red House) is a country house hotel located in Bournemouth, England. The house was built in 1877 by the Prince of Wales (later Edward VII) for his mistress Lillie Langtry.

==The Red House==

Lillie Langtry (born Emilie Charlotte Le Breton), was a highly successful British actress born on the island of Jersey. A renowned beauty, she gained attention in 19th century London society and had a number of prominent lovers, including the future King Edward VII. After a very public 'courtship' the couple embarked on an exclusive affair. The Prince soon decided that he wanted to have somewhere that they could get away from prying eyes where they could relax and be themselves. 
The Prince bought a plot of land in a secluded area of Bournemouth's East Cliff and told Lilly that she could design a home for them. Where others would have preferred jewellery and gowns Lillie was very practical and considered land and property to have lasting value. Lillie  designed the royal lovenest, adding personal touches: The foundation stone shows ELL (Emilie LeBreton Langtry) and 1877; The Kings Chamber had a lofty ceiling specially designed to disperse his cigar smoke; The walls featured original paintings and the couple's love of the theatre was reflected in the carved oak fireplace which featured hand painted tiles with scenes from Shakespeare. Lilly named the new home The Red House.The Red House 1877 - Lillie Langtry
A controversial feature within the building is a stained glass window dated 1881 on a staircase commemorating the birth of her daughter Jeanne Marie who was born in Paris and attended by the Prince's own Physician. Rumour has it that the child was fathered by Prince Louis of Battenberg, the Prince's Nephew, who soon after rose swiftly through the ranks of the British navy. Jeanne Marie was brought up as Lillie's niece and was only told who her father was on the eve of her wedding day.Hotels, East Cliff Bournemouth - History Langtry Manor
Lilly did not enjoy the house for long. In 1880 the Prince is reputed to have fallen out with Lillie during a fancy dress dinner party where she came down in the same outfit as him and when he protested that it wasn't the done thing she put ice down his back. Lillie refused to apologise as advised by her friends and overnight became a social outcast. Lillie (on the verge of bankruptcy) realised that she needed a job and embarked on an acting career eventually taking her to the USA. The house was never used by Lilly or the Prince again.Fall from Grace - Lillie Langtry

==Langtry Manor Hotel==

In the 1970s the Howard family renovated the Red House into the Langtry Manor Hotel, and restored many of the original items within the building including some of the original architecture and decor. The hotel complex includes Langtry Lodge (a smaller Victorian house originally owned by Lord Derby) where Edward and Lilly stayed while the Red House were being built. Today the Lodge is used as a conference hall and is licensed to hold wedding and civil ceremonies. In the main hotel there is a small display (the 1877 Collection) which holds memorabilia and artefacts of Lilly Langtry and the manor's history.Country Manor Hotels Dorset - Langtry Manor
In 2006 Langtry Manor again rose to public attention after appearing as the subject of the Five television series The Hotel Inspector. The hotel went onto win the 'Best Small Hotel' award as part of the first Bournemouth Tourism Awards.Events and News - Langtry Manor

==References==

==External links==


