[[Downe Township School District]]

CATEGORIES: Downe Township, New Jersey, New Jersey District Factor Group A, School districts in Cumberland County, New Jersey

The Downe Township School District is a community public school district that serves students in pre-kindergarten through eighth grade from Downe Township, in Cumberland County, New Jersey, United States. 
As of the 2007-08 school year, the district's one schools had an enrollment of 169 students and 16.0 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 10.6.District information for the Downe Township School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed November 5, 2009.
The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "A", the lowest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed October 27, 2009.
Public school students in grades 9-12 attend Bridgeton High School in Bridgeton, as part of a sending/receiving relationship with the Bridgeton Public Schools.Bridgeton High School 2007 Report Card Narrative, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed May 23, 2008. "In addition to city students, the high school also serves as a receiving school for two rural school districts, Downe and Lawrence Townships."

==School==

Downe Township School had an enrollment of 169 students in the 2007-08 school year.Data for the Downe Township School, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed December 7, 2009.

==Administration==

Core members of the district's administration are:Staff, Downe Township School District. Accessed November 26, 2010.Cumberland County School Directory, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed November 5, 2009.

==References==

==External links==


