[[Tracy Beaker's Movie of Me]]

CATEGORIES: 2000s comedy-drama films, British adventure films, 2004 films, British films, English-language films, The Story of Tracy Beaker

Tracy Beaker: The Movie of Me is a 2004 69 minute feature length film. It is the only Tracy Beaker episode television movie and aired on the BBC.

==Background information==

Tracy Beaker is 3 days away from her 13th birthday". She has black frizzy hair and is very mischievous. She also has a short fuse and a wild imagination. This makes it difficult for people to get Tracy to listen. After being abandoned by her mum, Tracy has lived in a care home kid for several years. Although Tracy can come across is being mean and spiteful, she does have a loveable and caring nature. At one point in the film, she states that she was scared when she was in the care home and so she became angry at the careworkers.
Then Cam Lawson (a woman who is looking about fostering Tracy) - a single woman and very unpromising mother material - and makes her fall in love with her indomitable attitude. Tracy imagines the world in her fantasies but her real mum (Carly) cannot come to visit her in the care home that she has christened `The Dumping Ground` because of her glamorous career as a Hollywood actress. This dream has been her comfort blanket and even when Cam offers to love her, she can't quite let it go. So what happens when fantasy becomes reality... and her Mum (Ruth Gemmell) turns up to claim her.
Cam eventually fosters Tracy but not everything goes as planned. Cam takes Tracy back to the care home. Tracy's mum turns up and takes her out. They become close but then Tracy's mum finds out Cam used to be Tracy's foster mum and feels hurt and drives away in a taxi. Tracy decides to look for her along with Crash who travels to Hopesten. They find her filming a scene on a film set, although Carly reveals that she is a stunt double and not an actress. Tracy's mum tells her to wait at her hotel but lets her down again. Cam and Tracy go to the nightclub where Carly is. Carly tells Tracy that she is moving to Hollywood to pursue her work and that she will come to collect Tracy in due course. Tracy asks Carly if Cam can foster her. She hands over Tracy and tells Cam to keep care of her. Then Keisha White performs "Someday". This is also the first time you get a hint that Crash and Tracy are becoming more than just friends.
During the end credits, Hayley meets Mark and Helen, her future foster parents whom she meets for the first time.

==Cast==

==DVD release==

The Movie Of Me was released on 25 July 2004 and can also be found in 'The Boxset Of Me'.

==References==


