[[Yokohama (chicken)]]

CATEGORIES: Chicken breeds, Chicken breeds originating in England, Chicken breeds originating in Japan

The Yokohama is a breed of chicken that originated from  Japanese breeds.  Yokohama is not where the breed originated, but it is the port where a French Missionary named Girad first exported the breed to Europe where further breeding would create the Yokohama known today.Hobson, Jeremy & Celia Lewis, Choosing and Raising Chickens, David and Charles publishing, London, 2009
It was developed from two different Japanese Cultural Monument breeds, the principal progenitor is the Minohiki or "Saddle Dragger". Some percentage of the ancestral founders were probably another Japanese treasure called the Onagadori, but it is likely that at the time of the founders' introduction to Europe, the lesser known Minohiki was simply not as highly celebrated as the Onagadori. Consequently, many Minohiki were likely confused with Onagadori. Regardless of which of these important breeds were more significant in the development of this unique fowl,the ancestors of today's Yokohama were imported from Yokohama, Japan.  In appearance, it most closely resembles the Minohiki breed, and to a lesser extent to the European Phoenix Breed, which probably shares many of the same ancestors. The European Phoenix however, has more Onagadori and less Minohiki in its genetic makeup, whilst the opposite is true for the Yokohama Fowl. The Black Sumatran Fowl is a close relative of the Minohiki and Yokohama. 

==Characteristics==

The Yokohama is primarily ornamental for many but it is actually an excellent breed for suburban poultry enthusiasts because of its calm demeanor. Better strains of this important breed are also relatively quiet in voice.  It lays cream or tinted eggs. If fed a typical lay pellet it will only produce on an average, one egg a week. Fed a higher quality ration with generous proportions of fish and animal protein and fat, it produces an egg a day and all through the winter. The Yokohama is a relatively small breed,only four to five pounds at the very largest.    It comes both in the bantam and standard sizes.  It has yellow skin, and can have either a walnut or a pea comb.
The most distinguished feature of this fowl is its unusual plumage, unique in pattern from all other domestic fowl. It is also celebrated for its long, elegant tail and tail coverts called saddle feathers.  The primary of emphasis for breeders with Yokohama cocks is on the length of the tail feathers.  Fanciers typically try to keep the birds in conditions that help prevent them from moulting in order to encourage tail growth.  Under the right conditions the tail should increase one meter (three feet) every year.  Hobson, Jeremy & Celia Lewis, Choosing and Raising Chickens, David and Charles publishing, London, 2009.  Page 104

==References==

==External links==


