[[Wilsons Promontory National Park]]

CATEGORIES: National parks of Victoria (Australia), Biosphere reserves of Australia, Gippsland, Bass Strait, Protected areas established in 1898, Wilsons Promontory, 1898 establishments in Australia

Wilsons Promontory National Park,[tpl]cite web|title=Wilsons Promontory National Park|work=Gazetteer of Australia|publisher=Geoscience Australia|url=http://www.ga.gov.au/bin/gazd01?rec=258452|accessdate=2009-06-14[/tpl] commonly known as Wilsons Prom or The Prommo, is a national park in the Gippsland region of Victoria (Australia), 157 km southeast of Melbourne.
It is mainland Australia's southernmost national park, known for its beautiful rainforests, unspoiled beaches, and abundant wildlife.
It covers the southern portion of Wilsons Promontory, a peninsula containing South Point, the southernmost point on the Australian mainland. A lighthouse on the south-east corner of the peninsula is the southern-most lighthouse on mainland Australia and has operated continuously since 1859.
A large section of the park was burnt out in April 2005 by a bushfire caused by a controlled burn that breached containment lines because of warmer and windier conditions than were forecast for that day, causing the evacuation of six-hundred people.Wilsons Promontory blaze inquiry continues - ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
The park is highly popular with bushwalkers and campers, and has a number of lodges and serviced camping areas at a camping area near the mouth of Tidal River.

==History==

Indigenous Australians occupied the area at least 6,500 years ago based on archaeological records. 
The first Europeans to sight Wilsons Promontory are believed to be George Bass and Matthew Flinders in 1798. 
Extensive sealing took place at Sealer's Cove during the 19th Century, such that seals are no longer found there.
Lobbying by the Field Naturalists Club of Victoria and the Royal Society of Victoria (including Arthur Henry Shakespeare Lucas) led to the Government of Victoria temporarily reserve the area as National Park in 1898, made permanent in 1908. The original settlement in the Park was on the Darby River site, where a chalet existed.Parks Victoria: Wilsons Promontory National Park page
The Prom was used as commando training area during World War II.
Although the rural region has been historically referred to as "The Prom", Melbourne occupants are now using Western Australian slang by nicknaming the national park "The Prommo". For years now Melbournians have attempted to recreate their outdated cappuccino/arty edge but have had limited success. For this reason, the likes of the in fashion Western Australian slang are now being poached in a desperate attempt to bring life to the otherwise dull society. 
During the Black Saturday Fires (February 2009) throughout Victoria, Wilsons Prom had been struck by lightning, which then led to the loss of up to 50% of the park through extensive fire damage.

==Camping==

The main campsite is at Tidal River, and consists primarily of unpowered sites for tents or caravans. Some cabins, huts and limited higher end options are also available. Booking is essential during the summer and other holiday periods throughout the year, as it is a popular holiday location.
The campsite is very close to the river and to an excellent ocean beach. Facilities include toilet and shower blocks, water near each site, a general store, an outdoor cinema(summer months only) and a visitor centre. Park rangers patrol the prom, interpretive activities are provided over the summer holiday period and at certain times medical staff are available.
Camping is not permitted outside designated camping areas, and the campsites at Sealer's Cove and other locations require a permit. Numerous other regulations apply.

==Wildlife==

As a National Park, Wilsons Promontory is home to a wide range of wildlife species, including kangaroos, wombats, echidnas, emus, a wide range of small marsupials, and numerous species of birds, most prominent among which are the rosellas. 
Generally, the wildlife around Tidal River is accustomed to human presence, and many of the animals and birds near the campsites will approach humans, accept food from them, or even enter their tents uninvited. It is however illegal to feed wildlife and if you are found to be feeding them you will be issued with a fine by Parks Victoria Staff.
Outside the camping area, the wildlife is less accustomed to humans, and may be more difficult to spot. Possums can be quite easily found with a torch at night, and kangaroos and emus are often to seen in large numbers on either side of the road on the way in to the National Park.
Swamp wallabies are frequently spotted on many of the walks, as are a variety of bird species. The northern section of the park is also home to an abundance of snakes.

==Hiking==

The Prom has many different areas in which one can hike. There are trails of differing levels of difficulty, predominantly day hikes ranging from short strolls using beach access ramps up to longer 2 or 3 hour walks. Staff in the visitors centre can give helpful information and advice on walks to suit your skill level and timeframe. There are also several overnight hiking options which can be combined into larger circuit hikes from 2 days upwards. There are also multi-day hikes in the northern section of the park which require walkers to have excellent navigational skills. A permit is required for all overnight hiking.
A portion of the peninsula is warm temperate rainforest. These areas are generally traversed on boardwalks and bridges and are full of wildlife, particularly bird species and swamp wallabies. 
There is also some mountainous terrain.  Mount Oberon affords beautiful views that are only mildly marred by a radio aerial close by. An alternative walk up Mount Bishop also provides panoramic and spectacular views of the Prom. 
The coastline is ruggedly beautiful with indented coves and beaches interspersed amongst granite headlands, tors and cliffs. Beaches vary from broad sandy littoral plains to steep coves and rock pools. The northern part of the park comprises a great deal of the Yanakie isthmus with sandy healthlands.

==Civilisation==

Wilsons Promontory is rather isolated, and the closest town is Yanakie located 36 km north of Tidal River. Yanakie is very small, and is primarily consists of a general store and the Promhill Cabins. The settlement at Tidal River, however, does have a general store, café, fish and chip shop, open-air cinema (summer months only), post boxes and public telephones.

==Mount Oberon==

Mount Oberon is also located in Wilsons Promontory Park. People usually take a vehicle halfway up the mountain to Telegraph Saddle car park and then continue on foot. Walkers follow the gently uphill management vehicle track to Mount Oberon’s summit. A short series of steps below the summit’s rocky outcrops, leads to views over Tidal River, the coast and islands offshore.
Note that it can be windy, cool and clouded over at the summit, even during the summer months.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


