[[John R. Newsome]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), Living people, Colorado Republicans

John Newsome is the U.S. state of Colorado's 4th Judicial District Attorney.  He was first elected in 2004, defeating Dan May 57-43.  May is challenging Newsome for the Republican nomination in 2008.

==Achievements==

Newsome created the Special Victims Unit, which focuses on prosecuting violent crimes against especially vulnerable victims.  He has also partnered with other law enforcement agencies to form LIMIT (Local Interagency Methamphetamine And Identity Theft Task Force) to combat methamphetamine and identity theft.Colorado District Attorneys' Council Announces Election Of New Leadership  His office also prosecutes a record number of felony cases, approximately 150% more than his predecessors did.

==Awards==

Since taking office, Newsome has received numerous distinctions and awards, serving as President of the Colorado District Attorneys' Council since early 2008.DA and Assistant DA Appointed To Executive Committee On September 11, 2007, Colorado Governor Bill Ritter tapped Newsome to serve as part of a small group dedicated to studying the best ways to collect, preserve, and analyze DNA evidence.2007 Annual Report

==2004 election==

In 2004, Dan May was the hand-picked successor to incumbent district attorney Jeanie Smith, and widely considered a "shoo-in" to replace her. Consequently, many people were surprised when Newsome announced his candidacy for the Republican nomination.Make My DA: Showdown For Top Cop  The contest was marked by contention, most notably when Smith demoted Newsome in the middle of the primary campaign.  Smith maintained that politics had nothing to do with her decision, but Attorney Dan Kay said, "This is all about politics.... Dan May's fingerprints are all over this."DA Candidate Newsome Demoted  Newsome ultimately defeated May by about 15 points.

==2008 election==

Newsome was expected to run unopposed for re-election in the 2008 election,Newsome: 'I sincerely apologize', The Gazette, 2008-05-06 but after news reports alleged that he had been seen consuming alcoholic beverages in bars then driving off in his county-owned vehicle,News First Investigates D.A. drinking during work hours, later drinking and driving, KOAA, 2005-05-06 Dan May announced he would run,Fellow Republican To Run Against District Attorney Newsome, KKTV, 2008-05-15 and collected enough signatures to get on the Republican primary ballot.Dan May Will Likely Go Head To Head With John Newsome, KKTV, 2008-05-27 KOAA TV, which filmed Newsome drinking at a local bar before driving, has yet to release the full tape.
On August 12, 2008, Republican voters in the 4th Judicial District replaced Newsome with Dan May by a margin of more than 20 points.

==Notes==


