[[MIP Politecnico di Milano]]

CATEGORIES: Education in Milan, Business schools in Italy

MIP- Politecnico di Milano School of Management was born in 1979 out of the partnership between the Politecnico di Milano, the largest technical university in Italy, and some of the most important Italian and international multinationals. It is located in Milan, Italy.It is one of the leading premiere business schools of Italy.
The School of Management of the Politecnico di Milano covers all fields of research and in-field training in disciplines relating to economics, management and industrial engineering.The school hosts a Management, Economics and Industrial Engineering department (Dipartimento di Ingegneria Gestionale - DIG) - providing Management Engineering degree courses (levels I and II) and the PhD Management Engineering Program - and MIP's Business School.More than 250 people (teachers, researchers and administration staff) take part in the school's activities. Every year, 600 students enrol as undergraduates and 400 students enrol for Master and postgraduate courses.
Mission
Training and applied research covering all aspects of management, with a particular focus on technology as a vital tool for corporate innovation and management.Promoting growth of the global corporate system, by creating an international network, and, more importantly, through the work of the School of Management of the Politecnico di Milano - with the aim of becoming a major international managerial training centre.[tpl]citation needed|date=April 2012[/tpl]
History
The Politecnico di Milano started up its Master course in Production Engineering in 1979. The course is currently known as the “MBA-Master of Business Administration”. It then changed hands and came under the responsibility of the MIP University Consortium founded in 1986. Plans were drawn up in 1987 for the “Corporate Management and Innovation Evening Course” - currently known as the “Executive MBA” course. Other extended and ad hoc teaching packages for business concerns were soon added to the master and evening courses. 
Applied research activities, projects, and observatories financed by the European Community were also organised during this period. The PEGASO project and other master and specialised training courses were started up in 2000.On the 6th of June 2007, the School of Management of Politecnico di Milano has received the EQUIS accreditation.
Associates
MIP is a University Consortium made up of various bodies and business concerns.
This consortium agreement is the premise whereby we can meet training and innovation needs in the field of corporate management.
MIP's Board of Directors include:
Politecnico Di Milano, Accenture, Acer, Assolombarda, Bticino, DANIELI & C. OFFICINE MECCANICHE, Edison, ENI Corporate University, FIAT Group, Italcementi CAV. LAV. CARLO PESENTI, IBM, INDESIT Company, Italtel, Pirelli, and Telecom Italia among others.

==Courses offered by the school==

==Companies In Project Work==

MIP enjoys a privileged relationship with many companies since 50% of its shareholders are companies themselves. The Project Work is the most important part of the MBA’s educational project. During this time students will be able to experiment and concretely put into practice what they have learned in class. The Project Work lasts three months, from middle February to May, involving a full-time experience inside a company or consulting firm.

==Accreditation==

==MIP In Numbers==

==Executive Education==

Short Seminars: MIP, the Business School of Politecnico di Milano, offers some Short Seminars in order to provide Executives emerging skills required by the changing competitive contest. Short seminars include topics like Design Management, New Marketing Models, Brand Management, Production Planning and Scheduling, Innovation, Leadership & Creativity Management.

==International MBA==

Admission to the MBA is limited to a selected number of students. Less than 100 students are admitted to the program from all across the globe.
The 14-month program consists of the Full Time MBA core subjects and electives in Finance, New Product & Venture Development, Service Management and Design & Luxury Management and is integrated with other activities such as Business Plan, Business Game and Project Work. The MBA is accredited by ASFOR (Italian Association of Management Education Institutions), while MIP is accredited by EQUIS. The MIP MBA Program is based on 4 pillars: Core Fundamentals, Monographs, Concentrations and Complementary.
Concentrations:
Participants have the option to customize their program by choosing from a variety of elective courses, focusing on advanced topics. Standard concentrations fall under the following areas: Design & Luxury Management, Finance, New product and Venture Development and ICT Management.

==MIP's Faculty & Visiting Faculty from Ivy Leagues==

MIP’s faculty is made up of a group of professors with extremely diverse professional and educational backgrounds. Their teaching is complemented by that of an international faculty. As a general rule, faculty use their own consulting work and the immense research facilities from Politecnico di Milano to provide up-to-date, diverse and relevant material for lectures and business cases. Faculty members make it a point to be accessible to students and to make classroom time an exciting experience.
MIP visiting professors come from Harvard Business School, MIT, HEC Paris, International University of Monaco, IAE -School of Business,Universidad Austral (Argentina), California Polytechnic University, Aalborg Universit (Denmark), Oxford University, University of Sussex, University of Manchester, CIO and Global Services Officer P&G, and many more.

==MIP & World Business Forum==

WORLD BUSINESS FORUM
MIP is the only Associated Business School in Italy of World Business Forum - Milan.The World Business Forum is a symposium featuring seven eminent leaders and thinkers speaking in person on topics of the utmost significance to the business community.In the previous years, 300 MIP’s MBA and Executive MBA students had the chance to personally attend the WBF, and to participate to Q&A sessions with the speakers of the Forum.

==International Exchange Programs==

During the Electives period (January - March), participants are given the opportunity to attend some electives abroad thanks to our International Exchange Program.Some of MIP Partner Business Schools are:
Institut d'Administration des Entreprises - (Aix-en-Provence, France)
Alba Graduate Business School (Athens, Greece)
IAE (Buenos Aires, Argentina)
Vlerick Leuven Gent Management School (Vlerick, Belgium)
Kühne School of Logistics and Management GmbH (Hamburg, Germany)
IPADE - (Mexico city, Mexico)
One of India's premier business school's IIM (Indian Institute of Management) hosted the executive students of MIP on the topic "Doing business In India" in 2009.
Indian School of Business hosted MIP MBA students for "Doing Business In India" week in 2011.

==European Career Service Network==

In January 2009 an agreement of cooperation was signed off between Audencia Nantes School of Management, HHL - Leipzig Graduate School of Management and MIP Politecnico di Milano.
The three leading and accredited business schools from France, Germany and Italy have formed a new business education network to better address the new business climate and the changing needs of businesses.The partnership intends to provide a pan-European network for future managers with the Career Services teams of the three business schools working closely to offer joint career placement advice and opportunities in order to better satisfy students’ requirements and needs in terms of their international careers.The three schools will provide MBA students and graduates with a superior quality of services, increasing networking possibilities and a collaborative alumni network. MBA students will also be able to access a common placement platform detailing company forums organized by each partner.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


