[[Encyclopaedia Aethiopica]]

CATEGORIES: English-language encyclopedias, Ethiopian culture

The Encyclopaedia Aethiopica (EAE) is the basic reference work for Ethiopian and Eritrean Studies. The Encyclopaedia Aethiopica provides access to reliable and state-of-the art information in all fields of the discipline, i.e. anthropology, archaeology, ethnology, history, geography, languages and literatures, art, religion, culture and basic data. Although the main audience is academic, most articles are readable also for non-specialists. The EAE is richly illustrated with maps and photographs many of which were never published before. It does, however, employ an in-house form of romanization of Geez, Amharic, and other languages, which varies greatly from standard formats, such as BGN/PCGN: the emperor Menelek II's name, for example, is written as "Mənilək II".
The Encyclopaedia Aethiopica has hundreds of authors from up to thirty countries. High academic standards are secured by an editorial team based at the Research Unit Ethiopian Studies (since 2009 Hiob Ludolf Centre for Ethiopian Studies) at the University of Hamburg in Germany, and experts on all important fields and a board of international supervisors supported the editors. Editor-in-chief is Prof. Dr. Dr. Siegbert Uhlig, former holder of the chair of Ethiopian Studies at the Asia-Africa Institute of Hamburg University and (since 2009) his successor Prof. Dr. Alessandro Bausi.
Planned to consist of five volumes when finished, the first four volumes (2003, 2005, 2007, 2010) are already in print. The first volume includes letters A-C, the second volume is dedicated to letters D-Ha, the third volume covers He-N, and the fourth volume has the articles starting with the letters O through X. The following volume will, besides the letters Y-Z, include a comprehensive index, supplementary articles, and additional maps and material.
The EAE is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, the Zeit-Stiftung Ebelin und Gerd Bucerius, the Fritz Thyssen Foundation, the German Israeli Foundation, the Johanna und Fritz Buch Gedächtnis-Stiftung, the Karl H. Ditze Stiftung, the Sigrid Rausing Trust and the University of Hamburg.

==References==

==Reviews==

==External links==


