[[Wright brothers]]

CATEGORIES: 1867 births, 1871 births, 1912 deaths, 1948 deaths, Aerodynamicists, American aerospace engineers, American aviators, American inventors, American United Brethren in Christ, Aviation history of the United States, Aviation inventors, Aviation pioneers, Aviators from Ohio, Burials at Woodland Cemetery and Arboretum, Congressional Gold Medal recipients, Elliott Cresson Medal recipients, Flight altitude record holders, Flight distance record holders, Flight instructors, Glider pilots, Gliding in the United States, Great Medal of the Aéro-Club de France winners, History of Dayton, Ohio, Inventors, People from Dayton, Ohio, People from Richmond, Indiana, Recipients of the Langley Medal, Smithsonian Institution Archives related, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Deaths from typhoid fever, World Digital Library related, American people of Dutch descent, American people of English descent, American people of German descent, American people of Swiss descent, Wright brothers

[tpl]pp-semi-indef[/tpl][tpl]pp-move-indef[/tpl]

The Wright brothers, Orville (August 19, 1871 – January 30, 1948) and Wilbur (April 16, 1867 – May 30, 1912), were two American brothers, inventors, and aviation pioneers who were credited"The Wright Brothers & The Invention of the Aerial Age." Smithsonian Institution. Retrieved: September 21, 2010.Johnson, Mary Ann. Following the Footsteps of the Wright Brothers: Their Sites and Stories Symposium Papers Wright State University, 2001."Flying through the ages." BBC News, March 19, 1999. Retrieved: July 17, 2009. with inventing and building the world's first successful airplane and making the first controlled, powered and sustained heavier-than-air human flight, on December 17, 1903. From 1905 to 1907, the brothers developed their flying machine into the first practical fixed-wing aircraft. Although not the first to build and fly experimental aircraft, the Wright brothers were the first to invent aircraft controls that made fixed-wing powered flight possible.
The brothers' fundamental breakthrough was their invention of three-axis control, which enabled the pilot to steer the aircraft effectively and to maintain its equilibrium."Inventing a Flying Machine - The Breakthrough Concept" The Wright Brothers and the Invention of the Aerial Age, Smithsonian Institution. Retrieved March 5, 2013"Wagging Its Tail" The Wright Story - Inventing the Airplane. wright-brothers.org. Retrieved March 5, 2013"Aviation: From Sand Dunes to Sonic Booms" National Park Service. Retrieved March 5, 2013Padfield, Gareth D., Professor of Aerospace Engineering, and Ben Lawrence, researcher.. "The Birth of Flight Control: An Engineering Analysis of the Wright Brothers’ 1902 Glider." (PDF format) The Aeronautical Journal, Department of Engineering, The University of Liverpool, UK, December 2003, p. 697. Retrieved: January 23, 2008. This method became and remains standard on fixed-wing aircraft of all kinds.Howard 1988, p. 89.Jakab 1997, p. 183. From the beginning of their aeronautical work, the Wright brothers focused on developing a reliable method of pilot control as the key to solving "the flying problem". This approach differed significantly from other experimenters of the time who put more emphasis on developing powerful engines.Mortimer 2009, p. 2. Using a small homebuilt wind tunnel, the Wrights also collected more accurate data than any before, enabling them to design and build wings and propellers that were more efficient than any before.Jakab 1997, p. 156.Crouch 2003, p. 228. Their first U.S. patent, 821,393, did not claim invention of a flying machine, but rather, the invention of a system of aerodynamic control that manipulated a flying machine's surfaces."Flying Machine patent." Patents. Retrieved: September 21, 2010.
They gained the mechanical skills essential for their success by working for years in their shop with printing presses, bicycles, motors, and other machinery. Their work with bicycles in particular influenced their belief that an unstable vehicle like a flying machine could be controlled and balanced with practice.Crouch 2003, p. 169. From 1900 until their first powered flights in late 1903, they conducted extensive glider tests that also developed their skills as pilots. Their bicycle shop employee Charlie Taylor became an important part of the team, building their first airplane engine in close collaboration with the brothers.
The Wright brothers' status as inventors of the airplane has been subject to counter-claims by various parties. Much controversy persists over the many competing claims of early aviators.

==Childhood==

The Wright brothers were two of seven children born to Milton Wright (1828–1917), of English and Dutch ancestry, and Susan Catherine Koerner (1831–1889), of German and Swiss ancestry.http://www.daytonhistorybooks.com/the_wright_brothers_2.htmlhttp://memory.loc.gov/ammem/wrighthtml/wrighttree.html Wilbur was born near Millville, Indiana, in 1867; Orville in Dayton, Ohio, in 1871. The brothers never married. The other Wright siblings were named Reuchlin (1861–1920), Lorin (1862–1939), Katharine (1874–1929), and twins Otis and Ida (born 1870, died in infancy). In elementary school, Orville was given to mischief and was once expelled.Wallechinsky and Wallace 2005, p. 12.
In 1878 their father, who traveled often as a bishop in the Church of the United Brethren in Christ, brought home a toy "helicopter" for his two younger sons. The device was based on an invention of French aeronautical pioneer Alphonse Pénaud. Made of paper, bamboo and cork with a rubber band to twirl its rotor, it was about a foot long. Wilbur and Orville played with it until it broke, and then built their own."The Wright Family." U.S. Centennial of Flight Commission, 2003. Retrieved: September 21, 2010.. In later years, they pointed to their experience with the toy as the initial spark of their interest in flying.Crouch 2003, pp. 56–57.

==Early career and research==

Both brothers attended high school, but did not receive diplomas. The family's abrupt move in 1884 from Richmond, Indiana to Dayton, Ohio, where the family had lived during the 1870s, prevented Wilbur from receiving his diploma after finishing four years of high school.The diploma was awarded to Wilbur on April 16, 1994, his 127th birthday. See Wilbur Wright entry at Facts/History WayNet
In late 1885 or early 1886 Wilbur was accidentally struck in the face by a hockey stick while playing an ice-skating game with friends, resulting in the loss of his front teeth. He had been vigorous and athletic until then, and although his injuries did not appear especially severe, he became withdrawn, and did not attend Yale as planned. Instead, he spent the next few years largely housebound, caring for his mother who was terminally ill with tuberculosis and reading extensively in his father's library. He ably assisted his father during times of controversy within the Brethren Church,Jakab 1997, p. 164. but also expressed unease over his own lack of ambition.Crouch 2003, p. 130.
Orville dropped out of high school after his junior year to start a printing business in 1889, having designed and built his own printing press with Wilbur's help. Wilbur joined the print shop, and in March the brothers launched a weekly newspaper, the West Side News. Subsequent issues listed Orville as publisher and Wilbur as editor on the masthead. In April 1890 they converted the paper to a daily, the The Evening Item, but it lasted only four months. They focused on commercial printing afterward. One of their clients for printing jobs was Orville's friend and classmate in high school, Paul Laurence Dunbar, who rose to international acclaim as a ground-breaking African-American poet and writer. The Wrights printed the Dayton Tattler, a weekly newspaper that Dunbar edited for a brief period."What Dreams We Have." nps.gov. Retrieved: September 21, 2010.
Capitalizing on the national bicycle craze (spurred by the invention of the safety bicycle and its substantial advantages over the penny-farthing design), the brothers opened a repair and sales shop in December 1892 (the Wright Cycle Exchange, later the Wright Cycle Company) and began manufacturing their own brand"The Van Cleve Bicycle that the Wrights Built and Sold." U.S. Centennial of Flight Commission, 2003. Retrieved: September 21, 2010. in 1896. They used this endeavor to fund their growing interest in flight. In the early or mid-1890s they saw newspaper or magazine articles and probably photographs of the dramatic glides by Otto Lilienthal in Germany. 1896 brought three important aeronautical events. In May, Smithsonian Institution Secretary Samuel Langley successfully flew an unmanned steam-powered fixed-wing model aircraft. In mid-year, Chicago engineer and aviation authority Octave Chanute brought together several men who tested various types of gliders over the sand dunes along the shore of Lake Michigan. In August, Lilienthal was killed in the plunge of his glider.Crouch 2003, Chapter 10, "The Year of the Flying Machine" and Chapter 11, "Octave Chanute". These events lodged in the consciousness of the brothers. In May 1899 Wilbur wrote a letter"Wilbur Wright May 30, 1899 Letter to Smithsonian." Smithsonian Scrapbook: Letters from the Archives. Retrieved: September 21, 2010. to the Smithsonian Institution requesting information and publications about aeronautics.Howard 1988, p. 30. Drawing on the work of Sir George Cayley, Chanute, Lilienthal, Leonardo da Vinci, and Langley, they began their mechanical aeronautical experimentation that year.
The Wright brothers always presented a unified image to the public, sharing equally in the credit for their invention. Biographers note that Wilbur took the initiative in 1899–1900, writing of "my" machine and "my" plans before Orville became deeply involved when the first person singular became the plural "we" and "our". Author James Tobin asserts, "it is impossible to imagine Orville, bright as he was, supplying the driving force that started their work and kept it going from the back room of a store in Ohio to conferences with capitalists, presidents, and kings. Will did that. He was the leader, from the beginning to the end."Tobin 2004, p. 92.

===Ideas about control===

Despite Lilienthal's fate, the brothers favored his strategy: to practice gliding in order to master the art of control before attempting motor-driven flight. The death of British aeronaut Percy Pilcher in another hang gliding crash in October 1899 only reinforced their opinion that a reliable method of pilot control was the key to successful—and safe—flight. At the outset of their experiments they regarded control as the unsolved third part of "the flying problem". They believed sufficiently promising knowledge of the other two issues—wings and engines—already existed.Crouch 2003, p. 166. The Wright brothers thus differed sharply from more experienced practitioners of the day, notably Ader, Maxim and Langley who built powerful engines, attached them to airframes equipped with unproven control devices, and expected to take to the air with no previous flying experience. Although agreeing with Lilienthal's idea of practice, the Wrights saw that his method of balance and control by shifting his body weight was inadequate.Tobin 2004, p. 53. They were determined to find something better.
On the basis of observation, Wilbur concluded that birds changed the angle of the ends of their wings to make their bodies roll right or left.Tobin 2004, p. 70. The brothers decided this would also be a good way for a flying machine to turn—to "bank" or "lean" into the turn just like a bird—and just like a person riding a bicycle, an experience with which they were thoroughly familiar. Equally important, they hoped this method would enable recovery when the wind tilted the machine to one side (lateral balance). They puzzled over how to achieve the same effect with man-made wings and eventually discovered wing-warping when Wilbur idly twisted a long inner-tube box at the bicycle shop.Tobin 2004, pp. 53–55.
Other aeronautical investigators regarded flight as if it were not so different from surface locomotion, except the surface would be elevated. They thought in terms of a ship's rudder for steering, while the flying machine remained essentially level in the air, as did a train or an automobile or a ship at the surface. The idea of deliberately leaning, or rolling, to one side seemed either undesirable or did not enter their thinking.Crouch 2003, pp. 167–168. Some of these other investigators, including Langley and Chanute, sought the elusive ideal of "inherent stability", believing the pilot of a flying machine would not be able to react quickly enough to wind disturbances to use mechanical controls effectively. The Wright brothers, on the other hand, wanted the pilot to have absolute control.Crouch 2003, pp. 168–169. For that reason, their early designs made no concessions toward built-in stability (such as dihedral wings). They deliberately designed their 1903 first powered flyer with anhedral (drooping) wings, which are inherently unstable, but less susceptible to upset by gusty cross winds.

==Flights==

===Toward flight===

thumb|left|Park Ranger Tom White demonstrates a replica of the Wright brothers 1899 box kite at the Wright Brothers National MemorialIn July 1899 Wilbur put wing warping to the test by building and flying a biplane kite that had a five-foot wingspan. When the wings were warped, or twisted, one end of the wings produced more lift and the other end, less lift. Unequal lift made the wings tilt, or bank: the end with more lift rose, while the other end dropped, causing a turn in the direction of the lower end. Warping was controlled by four cords attached to the kite. The cords led to two sticks held by the kite flyer, who tilted them in opposite directions to twist the wings.
In 1900 the brothers journeyed to Kitty Hawk, North Carolina to begin their manned gliding experiments. In a reply to Wilbur's first letter, Octave Chanute had suggested the mid-Atlantic coast for its regular breezes and soft sandy landing surface. Wilbur also requested and scrutinized U.S. Weather Bureau data, and decided on Kitty Hawk after receiving information from the government meteorologist stationed there. The location, although remote, was closer to Dayton than other places Chanute had suggested, including California and Florida. The spot also gave them privacy from reporters, who had turned the 1896 Chanute experiments at Lake Michigan into something of a circus. Chanute visited them in camp each season from 1901 to 1903 and saw gliding experiments, but not the powered flights.

===Gliders===

The Wrights based the design of their kite and full-size gliders on work done in the 1890s by other aviation pioneers. They adopted the basic design of the Chanute-Herring biplane hang glider ("double-decker" as the Wrights called it), which flew well in the 1896 experiments near Chicago, and used aeronautical data on lift that Lilienthal had published. The Wrights designed the wings with camber, a curvature of the top surface. The brothers did not discover this principle, but took advantage of it. The better lift of a cambered surface compared to a flat one was first discussed scientifically by Sir George Cayley. Lilienthal, whose work the Wrights carefully studied, used cambered wings in his gliders, proving in flight the advantage over flat surfaces.
The wooden uprights between the wings of the Wright glider were braced by wires in their own version of Chanute's modified Pratt truss, a bridge-building design he used for his biplane glider (initially built as a triplane). The Wrights mounted the horizontal elevator in front of the wings rather than behind, apparently believing this feature would help to avoid, or protect them, from a nosedive and crash like the one that killed Lilienthal.Jakab 1997, p. 73.  Wilbur incorrectly believed a tail was not necessary,Wright, Wilbur. "Some Aeronautical Experiments." Western Society of Engineers, September 18, 1901. Retrieved: July 14, 2010. and their first two gliders did not have one. According to some Wright biographers, Wilbur probably did all the gliding until 1902, perhaps to exercise his authority as older brother and to protect Orville from harm as he did not want to have to explain to Bishop Wright if Orville got injured.Howard 1988, p. 52.Crouch 2003, p. 198.

====1900 Glider====

The brothers flew the glider only a few days in the early autumn of 1900 at Kitty Hawk. In the first tests, probably October 3, Wilbur was aboard while the glider flew as a kite not far above the ground with men below holding tether ropes.Crouch 2003, pp. 188–189. Most of the kite tests were unpiloted with sandbags or chains (and even a local boy) as onboard ballast.thumb|left|The 1900 glider. No photo was taken with a pilot aboard.
They tested wing-warping using control ropes from the ground. The glider was also tested unmanned while suspended from a small homemade tower. Wilbur (but not Orville) made about a dozen free glides on only a single day, October 20. For those tests, the brothers trekked four miles (6 km) south to the Kill Devil Hills, a group of sand dunes up to [tpl]convert|100|ft|m|-1[/tpl] high (where they made camp in each of the next three years). Although the glider's lift was less than expected (causing most tests to be unmanned), the brothers were encouraged because the craft's front elevator worked well and they had no accidents. However, the small number of free glides meant they were not able to give wing-warping a true test.
The pilot lay flat on the lower wing, as planned, to reduce aerodynamic drag. As a glide ended, the pilot was supposed to lower himself to a vertical position through an opening in the wing and land on his feet with his arms wrapped over the framework. Within a few glides, however, they discovered the pilot could remain prone on the wing, headfirst, without undue danger when landing. They made all their flights in that position for the next five years.

====1901 Glider====

Hoping to improve lift, they built the 1901 glider with a much larger wing area and made dozens of flights in July and August for distances of [tpl]convert|50|to|400|ft|m|abbr=on[/tpl]."1901 Wright Glider" Wright Brothers Aeroplane Company. Retrieved April 11, 2014. The glider stalled a few times, but the parachute effect of the forward elevator allowed Wilbur to make a safe flat landing, instead of a nose-dive. These incidents wedded the Wrights even more strongly to the canard design, which they did not give up until 1910. The glider, however, delivered two major disappointments. It produced only about one-third the lift calculated and sometimes pointed opposite the intended direction of a turn–a problem later known as adverse yaw–when Wilbur used the wing-warping control. On the trip home a deeply dejected Wilbur remarked to Orville that man would not fly in a thousand years.Kelly 2002, p. 42
The poor lift of the gliders led the Wrights to question the accuracy of Lilienthal's data, as well as the "Smeaton coefficient" of air pressure, a value which had been in use for over 100 years and was part of the accepted equation for lift.
The Wrights used this equation to calculate the amount of lift that a wing would produce. Over the years a wide variety of values had been measured for the Smeaton coefficient; Chanute identified up to 50 of them. Wilbur knew that Langley, for example, had used a lower number than the traditional one. Intent on confirming the correct Smeaton value, Wilbur performed his own calculations using measurements collected during kite and free flights of the 1901 glider. His results correctly showed that the coefficient was very close to 0.0033 (similar to the number Langley used), not the traditional 0.0054, which would significantly exaggerate predicted lift.Crouch, "The Bishop's Boys," 1989, pp. 220-221
To learn whether errors actually existed in Lilienthal's data tables, the brothers used a bicycle for a new type of experiment. They crafted a model-size airfoil and a counter-acting flat plate, both according to dimensions Lilienthal had specified, and attached them to an extra bicycle wheel, which they mounted horizontally in front of the handlebars. Pedaling strenuously on a local street to create airflow over the apparatus, they observed that the third wheel rotated against the airfoil instead of remaining motionless as Lilienthal's formula predicted. The experiment confirmed their suspicion that either the standard Smeaton coefficient or Lilienthal's coefficients of lift and drag–or all of them–were in error.Crouch, "The Bishop's Boys," 1989, pp. 221-222[ref]
"Kitty Hawk in a Box" Wright Brothers Aeroplane Company. Retrieved April 11, 2014.[/ref]
Putting aside the cumbersome three-wheel bicycle, they built a six-foot wind tunnel in their shop and conducted systematic tests on dozens of miniature wings from October to December 1901.Dodson, M.G. "An Historical and Applied Aerodynamic Study of the Wright Brothers' Wind Tunnel Test Program and Application to Successful Manned Flight." US Naval Academy, Technical Report, Volume USNA-334, 2005. Retrieved: September 21, 2010. The "balances" they devised and mounted inside the tunnel to hold the wings looked crude, made of bicycle spokes and scrap metal, but were "as critical to the ultimate success of the Wright brothers as were the gliders."Crouch, "The Bishop's Boys," 1989, p. 225 The devices allowed the brothers to balance lift against drag and accurately calculate the performance of each wing. They could also see which wings worked well as they looked through the viewing window in the top of the tunnel. The tests yielded a trove of valuable data never before known and showed that the poor lift of the 1900 and 1901 gliders was entirely due to an incorrect Smeaton value, and that Lilienthal's published data were fairly accurate for the tests he had done.
Crouch, "The Bishop's Boys," 1989, p. 226
Before the detailed wind tunnel tests, Wilbur traveled to Chicago at Chanute's invitation to give a lecture to the Western Society of Engineers on September 18, 1901. He presented a thorough report about the 1900-1901 glider experiments and complemented his talk with a lantern slide show of photographs. Wilbur's speech was the first public account of the brothers' experiments.

====1902 Glider====

