[[The Bordellos]]

CATEGORIES: English rock music groups

The Bordellos are an English band based in Merseyside. When they first formed in 2004, they were:

==Career==

The core of the songs were written by Brian Shea with contributions musically from Parr, Oates and Storey. In 2005, Oates and Parr left around the time their first releases were made, with "Prince of Discontent" featured on an Upcoming Bands compilation album, and their debut single, "Scream", released in a download only format. Mike Simm left the band in December of the same year to pursue interests in ska music.
In April 2006, "Arthur Lee" (a tribute to the Love frontman of the same name) was released, as a spilt single with a Perfect Blue track. This was released around the same time as their debut album, Songs For Swinging Stalkers, at first a download only LP but later released in March on CD from Brutarian Records.
In April 2007, their second album Meet The Bordellos was released, formed from material recorded with the original core line-up, and also as a three piece on four tracks. Around this time Brian Shea's son, Dan, joined the band on keyboards and additional percussion. The Glorybound EP was released on Northern Star in November 2007. The band's line-up as of 2008 is:
The band's three singers are all related, with Antony the brother of Brian, and also Dan's uncle. They are certainly an unusual band, thirty years in age separating the oldest member from the youngest. Their third album, 'Debt Sounds', was mooted to be released through their own record label, Debt Sounds, but the budget was lacking to do this. This album's availability is currently limited to the St Helens independent record shop Kaleidoscope, direct request via Myspace, and a few tracks uploaded by Brian Shea onto Last FM. In early 2009, Gary Storey left to pursue a new musical direction with his brother Terrence and now leads his own bands - The Red Peles.  He has since been replaced.
In 2011 the band released a version of Bo Diddley's I'm A Man, on an EP entitled The Annual on Fruits Der Mer records, split across two 7 inch singles. A free Bandcamp release "It's Lo Fi! Folk Off!" also appeared at the end of the year.
in 2012 the bordellos released again as a free to download lp through bandcamp  the strange pop sounding The Monkee complex all the songs 
where written and recorded over the easter weekend and recorded in Brian'S living room.
in august of 2012 the bordellos released the 5 track ep bring me the head of justin bieber through the tiny isle of man based indie small bear records www.smallbearrecords.com and shot a video for the title track ..
2013 was a busy year for the bordellos releasing not only there ronco revival sound lp on daddy tank records , but also having the track spirals released on a fruits de mer comp strange fish four and a track on the small bear christmas download lp tinsle machine..
it was also the year that the bordellos started to gain airplay on bbc six music and a number of fine reviews for there ronco lp 
and it featuring in many best of year polls and there song temperature drop making dandelion radios festive fifty at number 30..

==Discography==

 2005—scream [download single] [chromium]
 2009—featured on the future is bright the future is cloudsounds—girl with no name / cloudsounds jingle[cloudsounds]
 2013-  spirals featured on the strange fish 4 comp lp #fruits der mer]
 2013-  ronco revival sound lp  [daddy tank records]

==References==

==External links==

www.smallbearrecords.com

