[[Mekka Don]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 births, Living people, Midwest hip hop musicians, People from Columbus, Ohio, African-American rappers, Rappers from Ohio, Ohio State Buckeyes football players, New York University School of Law alumni, New York lawyers

Chukwuemeka Nnamdi Onyejekwe (born September 6, 1981), also known as Mekka Don, is an American rapper, actor, lawyer, and entrepreneur. In 2012 he was named an "mtvU Freshman" and won "mtvU Best Freshman Video" for his music video "Dirty" in March of the same year.  Additionally, he has been featured on MTV, VH1.com, ESPN, Bossip, and several other media outlets.  His projects include collaborations with Bizzy Bone, MGK, D.J. Mick Boogie, and The Kickdrums.Swagg News  Most recently, his decision to leave his job as a New York attorney for a career as a rapper drew a mixture of praise and criticism on the law blog Above the Law following a feature on him that appeared in the ABA Journal.Above The LawABA Journal  This decision was also profiled in the July 2008 issue of the hip-hop magazine XXL.XXL Magazine

==Background and education==

Mekka Don was born Chukwuemeka ("Emeka") N. Onyejekwe to Okey and Egondu Onyejekwe, Nigerian immigrants, on September 6, 1981 in Columbus, OH.  He has 2 older sisters and an older brother, all of whom are practicing professionals.  He graduated from St. Francis DeSales High School in Columbus, OH where he was a two-sport star and member of DeSales’ State Champion soccer team as a junior and football team as a senior. He was invited to walk on The Ohio State University football team where he played wide-receiver and defensive back from 1999-2001.Buckeye Roster
Following his graduation from Ohio State, Mekka Don attended New York University School of Law, graduating in 2006 and passing the New York State Bar Exam that same year.NY Bar Exam Results  He worked as an associate attorney at Weil, Gotshal & Manges LLP briefly before leaving to pursue a music career.ABA Journal Online

==Career and Music==

Mekka Don began rapping and performing as early as 1999, but did not take to rapping professionally until he left his job as a lawyer in 2006.  He has been quoted as saying that rapping is his "passion".5Point Magazine
He has enjoyed early success with his single "U Know Mekka Don" reaching #2 on the college radio site www.rapattacklives.com surpassing singles from the likes of Lupe Fiasco, The Rza, and other well known artistsRap Attack Lives He recently released a mix-tape with D.J. Mick Boogie entitled "Law and Order.".Mick Boogie Blogspot  In the summer of 2009, Mekka Don released "For The Love Remix" featuring Bizzy Bone which was produced by Indiana producer Brian "Tails" Harris. He has generated a large following on www.myspace.com where many of his songs can be found and on www.youtube.com which contains pilots of his reality show The Legal Hustler.MEKKA DON: THE "LEGAL" HUSTLER - SEASON FINALE PART I OF 2 YouTube  Mekka Don' unusual career path was written up in the July 2008 issue of XXL Magazine in a story entitled Keep Pushin.Mekka Don Blogspot  Neither Mekka Don nor his label have announced any upcoming tour dates.
Mekka Don has also played a lead role in the critically acclaimed film, Sweeter Without Sugar (featured as "Wes") which was a Best Feature nominee in the 2006 African American Women In Cinema Film Festival.Sweeter Without Sugar
Mekka Don has become most notable for the release of an album with DJ Mick Boogie on January 13, 2009 entitled "The All Eyes On Me EP."  The album was written through the eyes of Barack Obama and showcased the difficulties he will face as President of the United States.  The album received critical acclaim with URB.com calling it "a beautiful stage show."  The New York Daily News believes Mekka Don is "bringing change to rap." [tpl]cite web|url=http://www.nydailynews.com/ny_local/2009/01/13/2009-01-13_rapper_mekka_dons_political_street_cred_.html |title=Rapper Mekka Don's political street cred earns Harlem group spot at inauguration party for Obama |publisher=NY Daily News |date=2009-01-13 |accessdate=2013-03-24[/tpl]  The Source Magazine called the album, "Your Inauguration Day Soundtrack."  Your Inauguration Day Soundtrack: Mekka Don & Mick Boogie (archive)  The album is available for free download on URB.com and on mekkadon.com.  Additionally, Mekka Don was featured in Jacque Reid's Man-Talk segment on her radio show.
In 2010, Mekka Don and his new partner Karen Thornton ("K") teamed up to form a songwriting team - The "Writer's Block" Writers Block (archive)
Shortly after the formation of The "Writer's Block," ESPN licensed a number of Mekka Don's songs to be played during the 2010 college football season - including the popular "Time to Rumble" and "SEC" available on iTunes.  Additionally, the MEAC conference licensed Mekka Don's song, "You Know I Ball" and used it as featured music in their 2011 basketball promo commercial seen on ESPNU.
In January 2012, Mekka Don released a single and video entitled "Dirty" which garnered major media attention.  As a result of the video release, Mekka Don was named an "mtvU FRESHMAN" by MTV and won "mtvU Best Freshman Video."  Additionally, his video was featured on VH1.com, The Source magazine's website as well as 50 Cent's website, Thisis50.com.  The song, featured on Shade45's show "Sway in the Morning," is currently available on iTunes.  Derrick Ward of the Houston Texans made a cameo in the video, "Dirty."  Later that year, Mekka Don released another video from a song off of his mixtape ("It's On"), entitled "Here We Go."  "Here We Go" premiered on MTV.com and VH1.com and the song was put into rotation on Shade45 on Sirius radio.Mekka Don's MTV page
In August 2012, Mekka Don signed a multi-song licensing agreement with ESPN Networks to use his music during college football broadcasting.Mekka Don signs licensing agreement with ESPN
In September 2012, Mekka Don was nominated for two Ohio Hip-Hop Awards (Best Male Artist and Best Mixtape Artist).  He soon (December 2012) followed up with a Dubstep-inspired EP, "Paradise", produced by Ohio producer Tha Audio Unit and hosted by Ohio DJ, DJ-EV.Paradise
In February 2013, Mekka Don and Ohio State University co-released a music promo video to his song "Let's Go O-H-I-O" to build hype and anticipation for the upcoming Big Ten tourney and March Madness.Mekka Don and OSU promo video
On the heels of the success of this video, Mekka Don signed a multi-song licensing deal with the Big Ten Network (BTN) for use of his songs in the 2013 Men's basketball tournament coverage.Mekka Don signs multi-song licensing deal with Big Ten Network
In the Fall of 2013, Mekka Don released an Officially licensed Ohio State University football anthem "Juice" - to be played at all of Ohio State's home games.  This licensing agreement with Mekka Don and The Ohio State University is believed to be the first of its kind in Hip-Hop history.  As a result of the popularity of the song and Head football coach Urban Meyer's mantra, "Bring the Juice," The Ohio State University and it’s new single-source apparel licensee, J. America, released a line of “Juice” T-shirts in conjunction with Mekka Don.http://buckeyebanter.com/?p=24560
In early March 2014, Mekka Don released his debut album, "The Dream Goes On" digitally on iTunes and Amazon to rave reviews from major press including MTV News http://www.mtv.com/news/articles/1724820/mekka-don-lawyer-turned-rapper.jhtml and The Source Magazine.http://thesource.com/2014/03/04/indie-rapper-mekka-don-raises-over-20k-on-indiegogo-to-release-his-debut-album-the-dream-goes-on/ In order to help fund the production of his album, Mekka Don took to crowdfunding on Indiegogo.com. His goal was to raise $12,500 in 35 days and he ended up raising over $21,000 in that time with over 300 funders.http://www.indiegogo.com/projects/mekka-don-s-debut-album (See also Societe Perrier article http://societeperrier.com/us/articles/new-york/how-lawyer-turned-rapper-mekka-don-became-a-grassroots-phenom/)
Physical copies of the album can be obtained from Mekka Don's site. http://shop.mekkadon.com

==Controversy==

Mekka Don's decision to leave his lucrative job as a New York City attorney to pursue a career in hip-hop has been met with extreme criticism.  Though the popular law blog Above the Law did not opine on the merits of his decision in its story, several of the blog's readers were harshly critical of his decision.  Mekka Don later stated that he is "trying to show that you can still make money, have swagger, have fun, and be young – all while doing things positively" and that "you only live once, so GO FOR YOUR DREAMS".

==References==


