[[The Million Hare]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 films, Looney Tunes shorts, American films, English-language films, 1960s comedy films, Films directed by Robert McKimson

The Million Hare is a 1963 Warner Bros. Looney Tunes theatrical cartoon starring Bugs Bunny and Daffy Duck. This cartoon short is directed by Robert McKimson and written by David Detiege.
A few clips from this cartoon were used, with color commentary by John Madden and Pat Summerall, as part of the fourth quarter of the 2001 Cartoon Network special The Big Game XXIX: Bugs vs. Daffy.

==Summary==

During the opening titles, a tune from With Plenty of Money and You plays on the soundtrack. The camera pans down a stack of TV antennas and enters the underground home of Bugs Bunny, who is hosting Daffy Duck. They watch a game show called "Beat Your Buddy" on the television. An announcer says that he will draw two names from the "buddy barrel". The persons named will race each other to the television studio, and the first to arrive will win "the million bucks." The announcer draws Bugs and Daffy's names.
Bugs and Daffy then race each other to the television studio. Daffy finds himself continuously hindered in the race, usually due to his own recklessness. For example, he drives a moped onto a bridge under construction and winds up in the water below.
Bugs keeps a steady and simple pace, causing him to reach the television station first. Daffy dons a jet pack, hoping to beat Bugs to the top floor of the studio. Daffy flies to the top floor, grabs Bugs, and zooms out the other end of the building. They land in an antique glass shop and are taken to a hospital. Even though they are in bandages with Daffy on crutches and Bugs in a wheelchair, they continue to race and Daffy crosses the finish line first.
Daffy then discovers that "the million bucks" is actually "the million box," a huge box filled with a million little boxes. Considering the prize worthless, Daffy donates the prize to Bugs. The announcer then reveals that there is a one-dollar bill inside each little box, and With Plenty of Money and You is heard again. After this, the announcer asks Daffy if he wants to tell the audience something. In this moment, Daffy's head slowly changes into a donkey (read: jackass)'s head and starts braying.

==Availability==

"The Million Hare" is available on the Looney Tunes Superstars DVD. However, it was cropped to widescreen. It is also available on The Best of Bugs Bunny DVD, also cropped to widescreen.

==See also==

==External links==


