[[Modesto High School]]

CATEGORIES: International Baccalaureate schools in California, High schools in Stanislaus County, California, Education in Modesto, California, Public high schools in California

Modesto High School is a public high school in Modesto, California, U.S.A. It offers the International Baccalaureate Program and the Avid program, and was the first public school to do so in the Central Valley of California.
Modesto High School is the oldest high school in Modesto and as of 2013 will be turning 130 years of Panther Pride.http://mhs.monet.k12.ca.us/content/Information/mhshistory.html 
In 1883, Ruliff Stephen Holway saw the need for a high school that could provide for needs extending beyond a primary grammar education.  According to Sol P. Elias, member of the first graduating class of Modesto High School students, R.S. Holway was "a young schoolmaster... with the advantage of a charming character and a sympathetic mind... zeal and personality... (who) guided the pupils almost through the entire course until his departure... to accept a professorship at the University of California." This man, MHS' first principal, was responsible for the education of the entire student body, playing a role of both teacher and administrator before he left to teach in the UC system.  Forty pupils comprised the first class organized at the first building located at 14th and I Streets; after four years, ten of these students remained to take part in the first graduation of MHS students. In the succeeding years, the number of seniors receiving diplomas fluctuated greatly; the lowest number occurred in 1893 when no one remained in school all four years to graduate.
The high school moved to its current location in the 1940s.

==Sports==

The school offers many sports.
For boys in the fall: Soccer, Football, Water Polo, and Cross Country.
For girls in the fall: Golf, Volleyball, Water Polo, Tennis, and Cross Country.
For boys in the winter: Basketball and Wrestling.
For girls in the winter: Basketball and Wrestling.
For boys in the spring: Baseball, Swimming, Tennis, Golf, and Track.
For girls in the spring: Soccer, Swimming, softball, and Track.

==Clubs==


