[[Barry Morrow]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 births, Living people, American screenwriters, American film producers, St. Olaf College alumni, Best Original Screenplay Academy Award winners

Barry Morrow (born June 12, 1948) is an American screenwriter and producer. He wrote the story and co-wrote the screenplay for Rain Man.
Several of Morrow's scripts are inspired by real people, especially people with disabilities and/or extraordinary talents.  These include the savant played by Dustin Hoffman in the film Rain Man, inspired by the real savant Kim Peek; and mentally retarded Bill Sackter, played by Mickey Rooney in the TV movie "Bill".  Both of these won writing Oscar, Emmy and other awards for Morrow and for the actors who portrayed them.
Morrow was born in Austin, Minnesota and studied at St. Olaf College.
Morrow gave his Oscar statuette as a gift to Kim Peek, the savant who was the inspiration for the character of Raymond Babbitt in Rain Man.
Along with the award-winning TV movie "Bill" (1981), Morrow wrote CBS's Bill: On His Own (1983).  His relationship with Bill Sackter is presented in the feature length 2008 documentary A Friend Indeed – The Bill Sackter Story.Tom Cruise: All the World's a Stage p145  Iain Johnstone – 2007 "It would never have happened without Bill Sackter who in 1920, at the age of seven, was placed in the Minnesota State School for the Feeble-Minded and ... A young student, Barry Morrow, and his wife, Bev, petitioned for his guardianship."
A member of the Association of Retarded Citizens, the National Association of Social Workers, and the Autism Society of America, Mr. Morrow is a lifelong advocate for the rights of persons with disabilities.
He is an avid golfer, and is known to play the majority of his golf rounds using an eight club bag of hickory stick (wooden shaft) golf clubs made pre-1940.Lorne Rubenstein – Moe and Me: Encounters with Moe Norman, Golf's Mysterious Genius  2012 p68 "Barry Morrow wrote Rain Man and received an Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay. Morrow had only recently taken up golf when he read the cover story about Moe that David Owen had written in GolfDigest's December 1995 issue."

==References==

==External links==


