[[McClelland College]]

CATEGORIES: High schools in Victoria (Australia), Public schools in Victoria (Australia)

McClelland College, is a secondary school in Karingal. The school resides in the suburb of Frankston located in Victoria, Australia.  The school has received a lot of government funding for their research into new learning environments and for their new VCE centre.
Previously known as Karingal Park Secondary College, the school was created after a merger of two other secondary colleges in the same area, Karingal Secondary College (formerly Karingal High School) and Ballam Park Secondary College (formerly Ballam Park Technical College). Karingal High School was originally located in the Life Saving Club in Frankston, during the 1950s, before relocating to the suburb of Karingal.
In 2009 Karingal Park Secondary College changed its name to McClelland Secondary College, although it was also known as McClelland College by the community. This decision was taken by the staff of the school and the local council. This led to a change in the school's uniform, and the school's colours are now purple and grey.

==School uniforms==

The school uniform was chosen by the College Council after a consultative process with the student body.  It has been described as conservative and distinctive, and originally included the option of a blazer, but this was not taken up by the vast majority.  During summer months, in terms 1 and 4, girls wear a summer dress, grey socks, and black shoes, with a purple college jumper.  Boys also wear grey socks and black shoes, and the purple college jumper, in combination with grey trousers or shorts and a white shirt.  For winter dress, in terms 2 and 3, girls wear the white college shirt and either a grey skirt or trousers with a college tie.  Boys are permitted to wear trousers or shorts during winter, and must also wear a tie.
The college enforces its uniform policy rigorously.  As the first uniform policy for McClelland College was white socks, they then changed it to grey socks and enforce this rule strongly.

==External links==


