[[International School Dhaka]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 1999, International Baccalaureate schools, Schools in Dhaka, International schools in Bangladesh, Education in Bangladesh, Buildings and structures in Bangladesh, 1999 establishments in Bangladesh

International School Dhaka (ISD) is a co-educational International Baccalaureate World School in Dhaka, Bangladesh which opened in 1999. The school enrolls students in the age range of 3 – 18, from Playgroup through to Grade 12, providing an international education for local and expatriate children living in Bangladesh. The school has teachers from New Zealand, Canada, Russia, India, USA, UK, Australia, Sri Lanka and Netherlands.
The school is recognized by the Bangladesh Ministry of Education and is accredited by the Council of International Schools, the New England Association of Schools and Colleges and authorized by the International Baccalaureate Organization.

==Campus==

International School Dhaka) is an oasis away from the hustle and bustle of the city. It is situated on the north-west of the city in the residential area of Bashundhara. The 4.5 hectare campus has centrally air-conditioned buildings including classrooms, specialist teaching rooms such as science laboratories, design and technology laboratories, art rooms and art exhibition rooms. Information Communication Technology supports all aspects of schools operations. 
Other facilities include an automated library, a sports hall/gymnasium, swimming pool, movie theatre, auditorium, art studios, cafeteria, playing field, tennis courts, basketball courts, playing areas and community gardens. Students are accompanied by teachers on field trips both local and overseas. They also take part in community projects.

==Curriculum==

The curriculum comprises the Early Years and the International Baccalaureate Primary Years Programme (PYP), Middle Years Programme (MYP) and the Diploma Programme. Graduates achieve results above the world average in the IB Diploma and attend universities in the United States, Canada, Netherlands, Norway, India, UAE, Singapore, Malaysia, Korea, Australia, and the United Kingdom.

==International Baccalaureate subjects==

International School Dhaka offers the following courses at IB Higher and Standard level:

==Community Action Service==

International School Dhaka's campus is home to the most sophisticated auditorium in Bangladesh. Here students from Primary and Secondary take part in productions of musical theater, drama, piano concerts, award shows, and charity awareness programs. 
An aspect of learning at ISD is for a student to develop experience in helping the community through volunteering in charitable causes and non-profit organizations (for example, Habitat for Humanity).
Students in Secondary School participate in the Model United Nations(MUN), with the team traveling to Malaysia, Singapore, and other nations around the world to partake in the annual MUN meetings. ISD is host to the local Model United Nations debate.

==Sports==

The school has one of the largest fields in Dhaka city, dubbed "The Field of Dreams". Other ISD facilities include a fully air-conditioned indoor basketball and gymnastics arena, a heated Olympic sized swimming pool and audience gallery, an outdoor basketball court, and two outdoor tennis courts. Each student participates in annual sporting events including a Sports Day and Swimming Meet. Students participate in a yearly Health and Fitness Week, where all classes begin an hour later to accommodate early morning yoga, jogging, dance, and other fitness activities; where students can also volunteer to teach.  
International School Dhaka also has some of the most successful secondary school sports teams in Bangladesh. 
Sports teams:    
Recent Achievements:
- ISD High School Boy's Basketball team won their first DISA championship in March 2012.
- ISD Middle School Boy's won the ISD MS Boys Football league in the 2012-13 season. 
- ISD High School Boys Football team came runner's up in the latest AIFT.

==External links==


