[[Roland Henin]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American chefs, American Culinary Federation Certified Master Chefs

Roland G. Henin is an American chef, and the corporate chef and chief culinary ambassador for Delaware North Companies. He is one of approximately 60 certified master chefs in the U.S. and has been recognized as an accomplished chef, culinary teacher and cookbook contributor throughout his career.taste3.com Roland G. Henin He coached Timothy Hollingsworth for the 2009 Bocuse d'Or in Lyon, France.Vallis, Alexandra, New York Magazine: Grub Street (November 6, 2008). Chef Timothy Hollingsworth Wants to Bring American Pressure to the Bocuse d’Or
The renowned chef Thomas Keller, owner of the French Laundry in Napa Valley and Per Se in New York City, cites Henin as his mentor.Powells Interview Keller helped select Henin to coach for the Bocuse d'Or.
Earlier in his career, Henin coached the 1992 gold medal U.S. Culinary Olympic Team. He also received the first-ever National Chef Professionalism Award ever granted by the American Culinary Federation. This success helped him to become the director of the Culinary Arts Department at the Art Institute of Seattle. He’s also taught at the Culinary Institute of America and Johnson & Wales College of Culinary Arts.
At Delaware North, Henin oversees the company’s culinary operations at national parks, sports stadiums and entertainment venues around the world. He helped the company develop its first-ever cookbook Pathways to Plate and its follow-up, Home Plate.Webwire.com (April 13, 2007). Delaware North Companies Publishes Cookbook In early 2008, the Jacobs family established a scholarship at the Culinary Institute of America in Henin's name that provides funding for future students who attend the school.The Culinary Institute of America (January 23, 2008). Delaware North executive Jacobs addresses CIA graduation
Henin coached five Delaware North chefs in the 2008 Culinary Olympics in Erfurt, Germany. All five chefs received distinction, with Ambarish Lulay and Scott Green earning silver medals and Kevin Doherty earning a bronze medal.Buffalo Business First (April 18, 2008). Delaware North chefs prep for contest 

==References==


