[[Ghulam Hussain Hidayatullah]]

CATEGORIES: Chief Ministers of Sindh, Sindhi people, Sindh politicians, Pakistani politicians, 1948 deaths, Year of birth missing

Sir Ghulam Hussain Hidayatullah  ([tpl]lang-ur| غلام حسین هدايت الله [/tpl], [tpl]lang-sd|غلام حسين هدايت الله[/tpl]) was a politician from Sindh, Pakistan.
Sir Ghulam Hussain Hidayatullah was born in 1879 at Shikarpur and received his education from Shikarpur High School, Sindh Madressah, Karachi, D. J. Sindh College, Karachi and Government Law College, Bombay.
After completing his LL.B. in 1902, he started his legal practice in Hyderabad Sindh. He started his public career as Vice President of the Hyderabad Municipality. Hidayatullah was also the first Non-official President of the Hyderabad District Board. In 1921 he became a Member of the Bombay Legislative Council.
In the same year, he was appointed a Minister in the Bombay Government, an office which he occupied till 1928 when he was made a Member of the Executive council of the Governor of Bombay. He served in this capacity til11934.
As a Minister, Ghulam Hussain Hidayatullah was associated with the famous 'Sukkur Barrage project' which contributed so much to the prosperity of Sindh in later years. He was awarded the titles of 'Khan Bahadur', 'Knight' and 'The K.C.S.I.' but renounced all his titles when the Muslim League in 1946 decided on a policy of renunciation of titles conferred by the British Government.
Ghulam Hussain Hidayatullah, along with Khan Bahadur Muhammad Ayub Khuhro, Syed Miran Shah and Sir Shah Nawaz Bhutto, represented Sindh in the Round Table Conferences in London.
They convinced the Chairman of the 'Committee on Sindh' that Sindh was not to be a deficit province and had sufficient revenue and administrative capability to be a full fledged province. Sindh was separated from Bombay and its first assembly came into being in 1937.
After the separation of Sindh from Bombay Sir Ghulam Hussain Hidayatullah became the first Chief Minister and remained so until 1947 with two short breaks when Allah Bux Soomro and Mir Bande Ali Talpur had formed their Governments. Sir Ghulam Hussain became the Chief Minister of Sindh three times.
In 1938, the Sindh Assembly passed a resolution demanding a separate homeland for the Muslims of India. In 1943, the Sindh Government became the first Provincial Assembly of the sub-continent to pass an official resolution in favour of the creation of Pakistan.
After independence Sir Ghulam Hussain Hidayatullah earned the unique distinction of being the only Pakistani Governor of a Province in Pakistan as all other Governors were British. This shows the faith and trust the Quaid-e-Azam laid in him.
Within a month of the passing away of the Quaid-e-Azam, Sir Ghulam Hussain Hidayatullah the "Grand Old Man of Sindh" died in Karachi on the October 4, 1948.

==Career==

Hidayatullah served as the Chief Minister of Sindh for two separate terms. The first term was April 28, 1937 to March 23, 1938. The second term was March 7, 1941 to October 14, 1947, and served the longest tenure that any chief minister has so far held. After the independence, he became the first Governor of Sindh from August 14, 1947 to Oct 4, 1948. He died in office.


