[[Vembadithalam]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Salem district

Vembadithalam Vembadithalam Facebook Page is a small village in Salem district of Tamil Nadu, India. The village is coming under Veerapandi Union. Vembadithalam means Land of Neem. Vembu is nothing but neem tree. Other nicknames of this village are Vembai and Vems City.
Salem is nearest city (15 km) for Vembai and well connected with NH47. Every half an hour public buses and private buses help to commute the people between Vembai and Salem.
Vembadithalam is located 6.8 km distance from its Taluk Main Town Veerapandi. It is located 19.9 km far from its District Main City Salem .
Near By Villages of this Village with distance are Kanagagiri (1.9 km), Naduvaneri (2.4 km), Senaipalayam (2.6 km), Rakkipatti (3.5 km), Periya Seeragapadi (4 km), . Nearest Towns are Veerapandi (6.8 km), Konganapuram (12.7 km), Salem (14.7 km), Taramangalam (15.3 km),
Anaikuttapatti, Ariyagoundampatti, Chennagiri, Inambiroji, Kadathur Agr., Keerapappambadi, ... . are the villages along with this village in the same Veerapandi Taluk
Vembadithalam Pin Code is 637504 and Have a post office. Other near by villages coming under this Post Office (637504) are Naduvaneri, Vembadithalam, Kandarkulamanickam, Rakkipatti, Kalparapatti

==Overview==

This village has one government primary school, a government higher secondary school and a government hospital with decent space and buildings. The schools and Hospital are very good in facilities when compared to surrounding villages. It has very small public library and had very good movie hall but it was closed few years ago because of some financial reason.
Now the Vembadithalam Primary School (Elementary School, from 1st Standard Class to 5th Class) infrastructure  is in pathetic picture of neglect and utter lack of basic facilities by officials and the big people of Vembadithalam. Please visit the school to understand the situation. This shows the domination of matriculation and private schools. The little students here are from underprivileged category. A personal visit to the school shown that these students are very brilliant and willing to learn and excel in their studies. The Primary School seriously needs help from all the ends like old students of the school, businessmen, officials etc.
While Higher Secondary School getting financial help from all the ends like few engineering colleges, polytechnic and businessmen for their personal benefit but Vembadithalam Primary School(Elementary School) does not get any help.

==Culture==

Textile is most important business. Mostly Kannada Devanga Chettiar community people doing the textile business or they shown the way to other community people to follow the textile business. On every week of Tuesday weaver gets weekly wages and they will do their purchases in nearby weekly market. Sowdeswari Amman temple, Marriamman and Kaliamman temple, Subramanya swamy temple and Perumal Kovil (temple) and Kasi vishwanatha temple are major temples. Sowdeswari Amman festival, Marriamman and Kaliamman festivals are celebrated every year without fail. Whole village get the new color on those festival days. Sowdeswari Amman festival is celebrated in the month of January (Tamil month of Thai). The people belong to Kannada Devanga Chettiar family celebrate this Sowdeswari Amman festival and it is a 3 to 4 days festival having lots of activities like Knife dance (Kathi Dance), Sakthi, Jyothi etc. Of course there will be lots of funs too like Orchestra (both classical and western) and drama etc. Marriamman and Kaliamman festival celebrated every year in the Tamil month of 'Panguni'. It is also 2 to 3 days festival, there will be activities like Thee Gundam (walking on fire), pongal (making sweet food for Amman) and vandi vedikkai (show of decorated vehicles or bulluck carts with some themes) in the evening of last day.
At Vembadithalam, the first initaitive of Siddharism and Pathinen Siddhar's Indhu Vedam practices for Merkku Mandalam was started in 1981 by Mr R J Venkatramanan and family and the "Mukambigai Alayam" was started by his father Mr A.K.R Jegannathan in their land closer to the lake. Subsequently from this initiatives and blessing of Pathinen siddhar madam and His Holliness Gurdevar and with involvement of many siddharadiyans of Vembadithalam, it had a unique recognition of having the Padhinon Siddhar " Tharu Kulam" which was built through the co-ordinated efforts of Vembadithalam Siddhar Addiyaans, Mr R J Venkatramanan, Mr T.R.Ramalingam, Mr Venkatesan, Mr Srinivasan, Mr Vijayragavan, Mr Mani, Mr L.K. Ganesan and other supporters, it was blessed and spiritualized by His Holiness Gnaalaguru Siddhar Arasayogi Karuwooraar, 12th Pathinen Siddhar Peedaathipathi.
The famous playback singer Krishnaraj (Vellarika.. Vellarika from Kadhal Kottai & Thanjavooru man eduthu from Porkaalam films fame) was born and brought up in Vembadithalam.

==Current Business==

The early business in vembadithalam started with handlooms and weavers were getting yarns from Salem and woven it. Then slowly started their own business and nowadays cotton clothes manufacturing, especially silk sarees are being manufactured and bulkly distributed throughout India.

==Facilities==

Tamil Nadu’s first rural telephone exchange opened in Vembadithalam.Vembadithalam Mr. Chandra sekaran has worked as a first incharge of that. It happened because of two weavers from this village; they were persons who weaved the polyester with handloom and show the new market for polyester yarn. Their name is Mr. KMS Rangasamy Chettiar and Mr. KMS Mari Chettiar respectively. Then Tamil Nadu governor VV Giri came to village to honour them. These two legend helped the village to have decent Govt hospital, Govt Primary school and a very good & well maintained Govt Higher Secondary School. Students from surrounding villages like Rakkipatti, Seeragapady, elampillai, vaikuntham, Sankakiri, Attayampatti, Vennandhur all are coming to this Government Higher Secondary School to pursue their study. This Government Higher Secondary School is well equipped with all Physics Lab, Chemistry Lab, Computer Labs and a wide eco friendly play ground. The one good thing about this school is whenever teacher transfer counselling happen, teachers are literally willing to come to this school to serve their entire service & Scholl celebrated its golden jubilee years Today 25.01.2014.
It is known fact that Mr. Dhanasekaran belonging to this vaillage had first started the yarn business years ago. Then the yarn business spread over to nearby villages elambillai, perumagoundan patti and attayampatti. But it's a question mark whether he is doing the yarn business actively nowadays. The Shree Veera Lakshmi Silks run by Janarthanan and Prakash (Military Nataraj Sons) is found to be  a genuine silk manufacturer and they have distribution all over India.

==Banks and Educational Institutions==

===Colleges===

1 . Gangaa Polytechnic College
Address : NH -47; Sankari Main rd; Kakapalayam; Vembadithalam.
2.knowledge institute of technology,kakapalayam

===Banks===

1. CORPORATION BANK, VEMBADITHALAM
IFSC CODE : corp0000243.
MICR CODE : 636017005.

==Political Facts==

This village comes under Veerapandi political constituency and the famous  Late.Veerapandi S Arumugam (affectionately called as Veerapaandiar) was from this constituency only. His son Veerapandi A. Raja was the former MLA for this constituency.
Mr. S.V Varadharajan Ex. MLA (Salem-1)& All world MGR mantra state leader, who is from this village & his son also is very famous doctor.(Dr. V.Gopalakrishnan)and his younger son V.Dhanapal, former vice president of Vembadithalam is a well known person in this area .
M/S Vijayalakshmi Palanisamy serverd as a minister when elected from this constituency.

==References==


