[[Requiem for a Tribe Brother (Williamson)]]

CATEGORIES: Compositions by Malcolm Williamson, 1992 compositions

Requiem for a Tribe Brother is a choral work by Australian-born composer Malcolm Williamson (b. 1931, Sydney - d.2003, Cambridge), who was Master of the Queen's Music from 1975 to 2003.Malcolm Williamson: A 70th Birthday Tribute (Paul Conway)

==Structure==

Lasting approximately half-an-hour, the Requiem for a Tribe Brother is one of Williamson's largest unaccompanied choral works, standing alongside the Symphony for Voices of 1962 and the Mass of Saint Etheldreda of 1990 in duration. Williamson divides up the extensive text of the traditional Requiem Mass into ten movements, as follows:
A brooding chant-like refrain for male-voices, simulating the drone of a didgeridoo, alternates with homophonic passages for full choir.
A tender 3-minute chorale with a harmonic palette which is neither diatonic nor chromatic. This is typical of Williamson, as is consistent throughout the Requiem.
Much in the manner of the opening Requiem aeternam, passages for soloists are contrasted with densely harmonised sections for the full choir. At nearly 5 minutes, this is the largest and most varied movement of the work.  
Highly operatic solos for tenor and alto are pitted against a richly coloured chordal backdrop for full choir.
After a grand and imposing statement of "Sanctus ... etc.", there is a lively dance-like coda in 5/8 metre on the word "Hosanna".
A mysterious introduction is followed by a reprise of the "Hosannas" from the previous movement.
In common with the second movement, the Agnus Dei is a slow chorale, featuring a highly pungent harmonic language and many unusual shifts of key.
This movement features two soprano soli which float above the rest of the choir throughout.
A fast and fiery dance primarily for tenors, built on an ostinato figure in the basses. Towards the end of the movement, there is a brief reprise of material from the opening Requiem aeternam.
The serene concluding movement, in C major, derives its melody from the opening of the Song of Hope from Williamson's choral-symphony for Kath Walker, The Dawn Is At Hand (1987–89).Harris & Meredith, pp.476 - 478

==Recordings==

==References==


