[[Hotel Continental, Oslo]]

CATEGORIES: Hotels in Oslo, Hotels established in 1900, 1900 establishments in Norway

Hotel Continental is a hotel in Oslo, Norway, that opened in 1900. 
The background story of the Continental is like an old fairytale, about a young couple, who through their hard work and entrepreneurship created a monument that will live for many years.  It all started in Sweden in 1860, with the birth of Caroline Boman.  Her family was poor, and instead of emigrating to America, something that was customary at the time, she crossed the border from Sweden to Christiania, now Oslo Norway in 1887, where she got a job as a cook. Four years later, she married Christian Hansen, who was from Oslo and worked as a waiter.
Hotel Continental and Theatercaféen opened in 1900, right after the opening of the National Theatre.  The business was originally owned by Foss Brewery, but was run by different tenants who all had to give up.  Caroline and Christian Boman Hansen took over the lease in 1909, and within only three years they were able to purchase the establishment. 
In 1932 and 1961 respectively the hotel and restaurant was expanded, and now occupies a whole block centrally located in the center of Oslo.  Through four generations the same family has built and developed the hotel and the restaurants into what the establishment is today. Elisabeth C. Brochmann is the current and fourth generation owner.  In 1985 she took over the daily operations from her mother Ellen Brochmann. 
The Hotel Continental offers 155 individually furnished rooms, many of which are newly renovated. The hotel is a 5 star property of high international standard, and is the only Norwegian member of The Leading Hotels of the World.  
The renowned restaurant Theatercaféen is part of the establishment. This newly renovated wiener-café is listed on the New York Times list of the world’s most famous Vienna-styled cafes. The hotel’s gourmet restaurant Eik Annen Etage is run by renown chef Ole Jonny Eikefjord in partnership with investor  Petter Stordalen. Hotel Continental has an extensive art collection, and in the lobby bar “Dagligstuen” there is a large collection of prints by Edvard Munch. In addition, the hotel has conference and banqueting facilities with the capacity of up to 300 guests.

==Literature==

Caspar Brochmann: Mors hus, Hotel Continental – en personlig affære gjennom 75 år. Oslo 1986. (Norwegian)

==External links==


