[[Baikuntha Shukla]]

CATEGORIES: People from Bihar, Revolutionary movement for Indian independence, Indian revolutionaries, Indian socialists, Executed revolutionaries, 20th-century executions by the United Kingdom, Indian people executed by hanging, People executed by British India by hanging, 1907 births, 1934 deaths

Baikunth Shukla (1907–1934) was an Indian nationalist and revolutionary. He was the nephew of Yogendra Shukla, one of the founders of Hindustan Socialist Republican Association (HSRA).
He was hanged for murdering Phanindra Nath Ghosh who had become a government approver which led to hanging of Bhagat Singh, Sukhdev and Rajguru. Baikunth Shukla was also initiated into the freedom struggle at a young age taking active part in the Salt Satyagraha of 1930. He was associated with revolutionary organisations like the Hindustan Seva Dal and HSRA. The execution of Indian revolutionaries Bhagat Singh, Rajguru and Sukhdev in 1931 as a result of their trial in the Lahore conspiracy case was an event that shook the entire country. 
Phanindra Nath Ghosh, hitherto a key member of the Revolutionary Party had treacherously betrayed the cause by turning an approver, giving evidence, which led to the execution. Baikunth was commissioned to plan the execution of Ghosh as an act of ideological vendetta which he carried out successfully on 9 November 1932. He was arrested and tried for the killing. Baikunth was convicted and hanged in Gaya Central Jail on May 14, 1934. He was only 28 years old.

==Early life==

Baikuntha Shukla was born in 1910 in village Jalalpur in Muzaffarpur District (now Vaishali). He got his elementary education at his village and became a teacher in a lower primary school in village Mathurapur. He took active part in Civil Disobedience Movement in 1930 and was imprisonedin Patna Camp Jail. He was released along with other Satyagrahis after the Gandhi Irwin Pact. Later he came in contact with the members of the Hindustan Socialist Republican Army and became a revolutionary.

==References==


