[[Robert Tjian]]

CATEGORIES: Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences, Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Howard Hughes Medical Investigators, University of California, Berkeley faculty, University of California, Berkeley alumni, Harvard University alumni, 1949 births, Living people

Robert Tjian (Traditional Chinese: 錢澤南; born 1949 in Hong Kong) is an American biochemist best known for his work on eukaryotic transcription.  He is currently Professor of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology at the University of California, Berkeley and an investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI). On April 1, 2009, Tjian became the President of HHMI. 

==Biography==

Tjian was born in Hong Kong, China in 1949. Tjian's father Tjian Tze-Ning (錢子寧), a native of  Shaoxing, Zhejiang, was a famous capitalist in Shanghai and pioneer of China's modern paper industry. In April 1949, Tjian's family and business all moved to Hong Kong; in 1950 moved to São Paulo, Brazil; and later settled in New Jersey, the United States.Baidu Baike: Pioneer of China's Modern Paper Industry: Tjian Tze-Ning  
Tjian received a Bachelor of Arts degree from the University of California, Berkeley in 1971 and a Ph.D. degree from Harvard University in 1976.  He was a postdoctoral fellow at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory with James D. Watson for three years before returning to the University of California in 1979 when he was appointed Assistant Professor of Biochemistry.ScienceWatch Archive: Robert Tjian Pioneers a Biochemical Path to Transcription Studies In 2008, Tjian joined the Board of Directors of the Lasker Foundation. 
In 1978, Tjian found the first protein of a virus which can regulate gene expression in mammalian cells. He showed that "activator" proteins, which previously had been shown to play crucial roles in regulating gene expression in simple organisms, also exist in higher organisms. He and his colleagues further discovered several gene-regulatory proteins.
Tjian is also notable in drug-target studies and their applications. Tjian developed some highly efficient and sensitive techniques to detect cellular quantities such as proteins. In 1989, Tjian, together with his other two colleges, co-founded Tularik Inc., a biotechnology company based in South San Francisco, California.
Tjian is also a member of the USA Science and Engineering Festival's Advisory Board.http://www.usasciencefestival.org/about/advisors retrieved 2010-07-05

==Awards and honors==

==External links==

==References==


