[[James Burton Coffman]]

CATEGORIES: 1905 births, 2006 deaths, American centenarians, Ministers of the Churches of Christ, American members of the Churches of Christ, Restoration Movement, Abilene Christian University alumni

James Burton Coffman (May 24, 1905 – June 30, 2006) was "one of the most influential figures among Churches of Christ in the 20th century.""Burton Coffman dies at 101," accessed August 19, 2008 He was known, especially during the second half of the 20th century, throughout the Churches of Christ for his exhaustive writing and study of Old Testament and New Testament scriptures. Throughout his life he served as a preacher, teacher, author, and community leader. Most of his career defined him as a teacher and administrator in school systems, congregational contexts, and even as a military chaplain.

==Ministry==

Throughout thirty years of congregational ministry, Coffman served and preached at the Central Church of Christ in Houston, Texas, and at the Manhattan Church of Christ in New York City, New York. He also served for a short time in the District of Columbia."Minister Burton Coffman dies at 101," accessed August 19, 2008. His contributions were considerable in every setting to which he devoted himself. He helped the Central Church of Christ build a facility on Montrose Boulevard. In New York, Coffman initiated The Manhattan Project, in which he helped to raise more than $1 million to build the first facility for the Churches of Christ in New York County on what happened to be the most expensive real estate in the world."Coffman still 'normal, booming self' at 100," accessed August 19, 2008. Coffman noted that "For 100 years, Churches of Christ in (New York City) have worshipped in converted residences, lodge halls, mortuaries, theaters and other make-shift facilities. A hundred years is long enough to prove that success cannot be attained by such means." Manhattan Church of Christ still stands and serves on the Upper East Side today.
Later serving as a chaplain in the United States Armed Forces, Coffman held many gospels meetings internationally. He also formed an initiative to increase the number of personnel serving as United States Air Force chaplains from the Churches of Christ. He is also known for conducting hundreds of gospel meetings throughout the United States.
He spent a year as vice-president of Harding University in Searcy, Arkansas. He received honorary degrees from Abilene Christian University, Pepperdine University and Magic Valley Christian College.

==Authorship==

Coffman is the well-known author of a 37-volume verse-by-verse commentary series, including every book in the Protestant Bible, which he finished in 1992. It is sold internationally, and serves as an amalgamation of many varying interpretations laid side-by-side for study along with a careful collection of research into the historical backgrounds of the biblical text."Coffman's writings are lasting contribution," accessed August 19, 2008"Biography of James Burton Coffman," accessed August 19, 2008 His commentary series and biography can be found at Coffman Commentaries.
His five-part collection of memoirs is available through Abilene Christian University's Center for Restoration Studies.

==Education==

B.A. Abilene Christian University (1927)

==References==


