[[Howard Benedict]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Year of birth missing (living people), Lafayette College alumni

Howard Benedict is an American high school lacrosse coach.  He was the first varsity coach at New Canaan High School, where he coached for 34 years. He is considered one of the "founding fathers of Connecticut lacrosse." 

==Biography==

Benedict grew up in Fairfield Connecticut, and graduated from Fairfield College Preparatory School.  Benedict was a varsity lacrosse player at Lafayette College, graduating in 1967.
He coached the first varsity team in New Canaan in 1974 (he was also an English teacher at the school). Benedict founded the New Canaan Lacrosse Association in 1979. His brother, Jonathan, who went on to become the Chief Connecticut State Prosecutor (famous for convicting Michael Skakel), drew up the non-profit incorporation papers.
Benedict went on to win a combined 18 FCIAC and CT State Championships and is still the winningest coach in Connecticut lacrosse history. In three different decades, he would help lead the Rams to undefeated seasons (1982, 1990, 2003), still the most of any school in Connecticut.  After a controversial dismissal by New Canaan High School administrators during the winter 2008, Benedict was named the US Lacrosse CT Man of the Year in the spring of 2008.
He was inducted into the Connecticut Lacrosse Hall of Fame in 2011, as "truly a great coach."  Also inducted in 2011 was one of Benedict's former players, Andy Towers, current coach at Dartmouth College.  Towers was the first ever player inducted into the Connecticut Lacrosse Hall of Fame.
In 2013, one of Benedict's former players, Chip Buzzeo, was named the head coach at New Canaan High School, just the third coach in program history.  In an April 4, 2013 article in the New Canaan Advertiser, Buzzeo commented on Benedict's impact:
"As far as Buzzeo is concerned, the name of the game is preparation and being ready for anything that comes the team’s way, something he learned while playing for coach Howard Benedict at NCHS.  'It’s not a coincidence that there’s New Canaan alums coaching in the college ranks with Andy Towers, Mike Murphy and Dave Campbell. A lot of that comes from the way coach Benedict taught us how to play the game and his focus on fundamentals, Xs and Os, and understanding the game.'"
In November 2013, Benedict inducted New Canaan's first All-American, Carl Nissen, into the Connecticut Lacrosse Hall of Fame.  On the same night, he inducted current Fairfield Prep lacrosse coach Christopher Smalkais.

==Players==

Benedict has coached a long list of outstanding players who have succeeded in the highest levels of college lacrosse.  A number of his players were drafted to play professionally in the MLL, these include:  Andy Towers ’87 (Brown), Scott Harrison ’91 (Duke), David Curry ‘93 (UVA), Austin Garrison ’98 (UNC), Dan Gross ’01 (Loyola), Tommy Harris '03 (Hartford), David Hawley ’07 (Brown) and Charlie Streep ’07 (Bucknell/UVA).
Benedict himself was honored by Major League Lacrosse at the "The Reunion Celebration," hosted by the MLL which was a tribute to the lacrosse talent produced by the state of Connecticut and those who have contributed to the game’s growth in the state. At halftime of the first-ever MLL Lacrosse Star game in Bridgeport Connecticut, Major League Lacrosse honored the coaches and players whose contributions have made Connecticut into an important pool. Benedict was named one of the Connecticut Lacrosse "Star Reunion Honorees" 
"The sport of lacrosse has a very rich history, especially here in the great state of Connecticut," said MLL founder, Jake Steinfeld, CEO of Body by Jake enterprises. "Recognizing individuals like Guy Whitten, Howard Benedict and Jeff Brameier who have had a positive impact on the development of lacrosse enhances that rich tradition, not only for today, but for the future of the sport in Connecticut."

==Coaches==

Many of Benedict’s players have become coaches at high level high school and colleges, these include: (current or most recent positions listed, listed oldest to youngest, * denotes having coached with Benedict at NCHS)

==References==

==External links==


