[[Economy of Belarus]]

CATEGORIES: Economy of Belarus

==Overview==

After the fall of the Soviet Union, all former Soviet republics faced a deep economic crisis. Belarus has however chosen its own way of overcoming this crisis. After the 1994 election of Alexander Lukashenko as the first President, he launched the country on the path of "market socialism" as opposed to what Lukashenko considered "wild capitalism" chosen by Russia at that time. In keeping with this policy, administrative controls over prices and currency exchange rates were introduced. Also the state's right to intervene in the management of private enterprise was expanded, but on March 4, 2008, the President issues a decree abolishing the golden share rule in a clear movement to improve its international rating regarding the foreign investment.
As part of the former Soviet Union, Belarus had a relatively well developed industrial base; it retained this industrial base following the break-up of the USSR. The country also has a broad agricultural base and a high education level. Among the former republics of the Soviet Union, it had one of the highest standards of living. But Belarusians now face the difficult challenge of moving from a state-run economy with high priority on military production and heavy industry to a civilian, free-market system.
From 1991–1995, all sectors of the national economy were affected by the profound economic crisis, triggered by the collapse of the Soviet Union. At first, this event triggered the end of traditional economic processes, the sharp drop in the economic capacity of enterprises and of the population of the republics of the former Soviet Union that were key consumers of Belarus products, cessation of financing from the Soviet Union’s military sector which accounted for a considerable share of Belarus’ industry, shocks of price liberalization, and, above all, outpacing growth in prices for raw materials and energy resources. Moreover, Belarus, like the rest of the former Soviet Union republics, was characterized by a general lack of preparedness of the country’s institution and society for the market system of relations. The sharp growth in prices for raw materials and energy resources revealed the technological weakness of the economy with its resource-intensive and low-quality output. At the same time, the weak competitiveness of the local products, legal inter-government restrictions, and absence of marketing and financial management skills prevented the country’s economic entities from making up for the drop in effective demand at the traditional markets through the conquer of new export markets.
Peat, the country's most valuable mineral resource, is used for fuel and fertilizer and in the chemical industry. Belarus also has deposits of clay, sand, chalk, dolomite, phosphorite, and rock and potassium salt. Forests cover about a third of the land, and lumbering is an important sector.
The massive nuclear accident (April 26, 1986) at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, across the border in Ukraine, had a devastating effect on Belarus; as a result of the radiation release, agriculture in a large part of the country was destroyed, and many villages were abandoned. Resettlement and medical costs were substantial and long-term.

===Under Lukashenko===

The Belarusian government takes a series of measures in order to stimulate growth like provision of monetary stimulation by fostering banking credit activity and reduction of interest; provision of fiscal stimulation (raise of the first class wage rate, and, consequently, all pay rates); attraction of foreign loans to maintain stability of the currency market in conditions of the high demand on import; and smooth devaluation of the national currency.
The period between 1996 and 2000 was also characterized by significant financial distress, in particular in 1998 and 1999 as a result of the financial and economic crisis in Russia. This resulted primarily in a sharp increase in prices and the devaluation of the national currency, a decline in trade with Russia and other CIS countries, growth in inter-enterprise arrears, and overall deterioration of the country’s balance of payments. Extreme tension within the foreign exchange market was the key factor that destabilized the economy in 1998 and 1999. In 1999, consumer prices grew by 294%.
Between 2001 and 2005, the national economy demonstrated steady and dynamic growth. The GDP grew at an average rate of 7.4 percent, peaking in 2005 at 9.2 percent. This growth was mainly a result of the performance of the industrial sector, which grew on average more than 8.7 percent per year, with a high of 10.4 percent in 2005. Potatoes, flax, hemp, sugarbeets, rye, oats, and wheat are the chief agricultural products. Dairy and beef cattle, pigs, and chickens are raised. Belarus has only small reserves of petroleum and natural gas and imports most of its oil and gas from Russia. The main branches of industry produce tractors and trucks, earth movers for use in construction and mining, metal-cutting machine tools, agricultural equipment, motorcycles, chemicals, fertilizer, textiles, and consumer goods. The chief trading partners are Russia, Ukraine, Poland, and Germany.
the Belarus GDP grew 9.9% in 2006MENAFN - Middle East North Africa . Financial Network News: Oman, Belarus exploring business avenues in the first quarter 2007, GDP grew 8.2%.World Bank - Belarus Country Brief 2008 - Accessed Jan.20, 2009  GDP further grew in 2008 by 10%.AgriMarket.Info - Accessed Jan. 20, 2009.

===Сrisis of 2011===

Shortly before the 2010 presidential election average salaries in Belarus were increased by the government to $500 per month. It is believed to be one of the main reasons for the crisis in 2011.Presidential election played role as catalyst for economic crisis, expert says Other reasons for the crisis were strong governmental control in the economy, a discount rate lower than inflation and the budget deficit.Ярослав Романчук. КРИЗИС. Четыре айсберга для белорусского «Титаника» (by economist Jaroslav Romanchuk) [tpl]ref-ru[/tpl]
In January 2011 Belarusians started to convert their savings from belarusian rubles to dollars and euro. The situation was influenced by rumors of possible devaluation of the ruble.ЦБ Белоруссии отказался продавать банкам валюту для населения [tpl]ref-ru[/tpl] Exchange rates in Belarus are centralized by the government-controlled National Bank of Belarus. The National Bank was forced to spend $1 billion of the foreign reserves to balance the supply and demand of currency On March 22 it stopped the support to banks. The National Bank also didn't change the exchange rate significantly (3,000 BYR per dollar on January 1 and 3,045 BYR on April 1), so the increased demand of dollars and euro exhausted cash reserves of banks. In April and May 2011 many people had to wait for several days in queues to buy dollars in the exchange booths. In April Belarusian banks were given informal permission of government to increase the exchange rate to 4,000 BYR for 1 dollar (later 4,500 BYR), but few people started to sell dollars and euro. On May 24 the ruble was officially devaluated by 36% (from 3,155 to 4,931 BYR per 1 dollar).VTB Says Belarus Bound for Meltdown, Ruble Plunge, as Locals Hoard Fridges, Bloomberg But the shortage of the currency retained. As a result of the shortage, a black market of currency was created. In July 2011 the black market exchange rate was nearly 6,350 BYR per 1 dollar,Ruble-dollar black market exchange rate reaches 6,350 in August it reached 9,000 BYR per 1 dollar.Реакция валютчиков - доллар взлетел до 8500-9000 рублей [tpl]ref-ru[/tpl]
In September 2011 National Bank of Belarus introduced a free exchange market session to determine a market value of the ruble.US dollar reaches 8,600 rubels at additional trading session From November 2011 to March 2012 the exchange rate was 8,000—8,150 BYR per 1 dollar, but it started to rise in April 2012 and reached 8,360 BYR per 1 dollar on 10 July 2012.Official Exchange Rate of the Belarusian Ruble Versus Foreign Currencies Set by the National Bank of the Republic of Belarus on a Daily Basis as of July 10, 2012
Recovery from the crisis was difficult due to isolation of the Belarusian government from the EU and USA.Belarus Economic Crisis Deepens as Currency Plunges, The New York Times
The crisis strongly affected the economy. Inflation reached 108.7% in 2011.http://wyborcza.biz/biznes/1,100896,10936099,Bialorus__Inflacja_w_2011_r__wyniosla_108_7_proc_.html Average salary (counted in dollars) decreased from $530 in December 2010 to $330 in May 2011.Белстат: средняя зарплата с начала года снизилась на 200 долларов In May 2012 the average salary reached $436 (3,559,600 with 8,165 per dollar). Refinancing rate (analogue of discount rate) rose from 10.5% in December 2010 to 45% in December 2011Government expects National Bank’s refinance rate to decreased by half by year-end, vice premier says and fell to 32% in June 2012.National Bank of the Republic of Belarus: Refinancing Rate In November 2011 interest rates of several banks reached 120% in rubles.Белорусские банки на грани краха [tpl]ref-ru[/tpl]

==Monetary policy==

During 1995-1998 monetary policy was highly expansionary. Net domestic
credit of NBB was increasing at the rate of over 100 percent from 1996 till mid-1998 as a consequence of numerous presidential decrees and resolution of the Council of Ministers instructing NBB to extend credits. Since no external sources were available for covering state budget deficit, the NBB emission activity provided its financing. Also, through authorized banks serving governmental programs, the NBB extended preferential targeted loans to state-owned enterprises. The list of credited enterprises is prepared by the government and sometimes depends on the ad-hoc strategies of development. In 2000, Belarus managed to unify its currency exchange rates, tightened its monetary policy, and partially liberalized the foreign currency market. Starting from the period of an administrative peg of the exchange rate of the Belarusian ruble in 1995, the monetary policy was based on administrative regulation of interest rates. In November 1995, administrative limitations of the inter-bank credit market activity were initiated and still remain in force. In spite of the Central Bank Law passed in 1994 guaranteeing its independence, President Lukashenko has a power to nominate and dismiss the Chairman of the NBB. and to formulate monetary and foreign exchange policy. Over the past years, preferential credits, administrative price setting, and decline of the interests rate spread below 15 percentage points in the second quarter of 1997 resulted in damaging consequences to enterprises and especially banks. As the process of exhaustion of the Central Bank's hard currency reserves exhibits a dangerous tendency, government introduced restrictions on currency transactions. These have resulted in inconvertibility of the Belarusian ruble for the current transactions since March 1998.

===Inflation===

Since 1996, in accordance with the presidential decree, enterprises, irrespective of their forms of ownership, and governmental bodies in charge of economic management have been given forecast figures of monthly and yearly inflation and devaluation as practically administrative directives. Over 70 percent of the goods consisted in the consumption basket have controlled prices, therefore indices of inflation are hardly reliable. In 1998, administratively imposed limit on maximum price growth was 2 percent per month (or 27 percent per year). However, monetary expansion and devaluation of the official
exchange rates had to lead to increase in official index of inflation above the planned level.

===Foreign exchange market===

The NBB regulates the foreign currency market by means of administrative
instruments that support a system of multiple exchange rates. Such an activity of the central bank should be regarded as quasi-fiscal and taken into account in the state budget. However, it is not the case. The NBB sells foreign currency at preferential exchange rate to a selected pool of importers that means latent financing of certain import operations. Through the channels of critical import funding, large enterprises with indebtedness for energy carriers enjoy financial benefits. Also critical import, like medicines, food-staff, raw materials, machinery and equipment is subject to preferential exchange rate. To finance critical import, a mechanism of mandatory sale of foreign currency receipts is in operation. In January 1996, the obligatory surrender requirement was 100 percent. In July 1996, it slimmed down to 50 percent, and further down to 30 percent in June 1997. On January 22, 1998, an additional trade session was introduced at the Minsk Currency Exchange, which subsisted until August 22, 1998. For the second time, the additional session was restored starting from December 16, 1998 and was cancelled again on March 1, 1999. In July 1998, the government forced exporters to sell 10 percent of their export receipts at the second session of the Minsk Currency Exchange, in addition to the existing authorized 30-percent ratio. In Aug 1998, following the closure of the second Minsk Currency Exchange session, the rate of mandatory sale of foreign currency was set at 40 percent.

==Privatisation==

In 1991, state ownership restructuring began in the first 40 enterprises. On January 19, 1993 the Law "On destatisation and privatisation of state property in the Republic of Belarus" was adopted, which should have become the basis for wide privatisation in Belarus[tpl]Citation needed|date=October 2010[/tpl]. On May 8, in his state-of-nation address to the parliament, President Lukashenko outlined his plans for partial privatization of enterprises. According to him, "In order to privatize an enterprise, a prospective buyer should go not to the president but to the enterprise, and it is the work collective that has to decide whether or not privatization will take place. Then the deal must be approved by local authorities, then departmental officials and then by the government which only after considering all pros and cons can submit it to the president”."Lukashenko Sets Out Rigid Privatization Rules", RIA Novosti, May 8, 2012.

==Wages and labour market==

