[[Martin Henson]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, People from Reading, Berkshire, Living people, Alumni of the University of Southampton, Alumni of the University of Reading, Alumni of the University of Essex, English computer scientists, Formal methods people, Academics of the University of Essex, English bloggers, Fellows of the British Computer Society

Professor Martin C. Henson FBCS FRSA (born 1954) is an English computer scientist based at the University of Essex.Academic Staff: Prof Martin Henson, School of Computer Science & Electronic Engineering, University of Essex, UK. He is Dean for International Affairs and is affiliated to the School of Computer Science & Electronic Engineering.Martin Henson, Academia.edu.Martin Henson, QAlias.
Henson was Head of the Department of Computer Science from 2000–2006.

==Education==

Martin Henson was educated at The Bulmershe School in Woodley, Berkshire, at the University of Southampton (BSc, 1976), at the University of Reading (PGCE, 1977), and the University of Essex (MSc, 1981).

==Academic research==

Henson's academic work is in the area of formal methods to aid software engineering. His early work was in programming language semantics, especially using algebraic approaches for structuring compiler and interpreter generation from semantic descriptions. He moved on to work in functional languages, focusing on program verification and transformation, pioneering an approach to program transformation, adapted from work in semantic equivalences, using higher-order generalisations and relational constraints. Since the late 1990s, he has undertaken research into the design and use of logics of specification and program development. With Steve Reeves, he has studied the formal semantics of the Z notation in detail. This work was used in the international ISO standard for the Z notation.''Information Technology — Z Formal Specification Notation — Syntax, Type System and Semantics, ISO/IEC 13568:2002, ISO, 2002. Most recently he has proposed a new approach to specification, based on specification theories, developing the specification logic nuZ – a Z-like specification language with a monotonic schema calculus. This was first presented in a talk in the BCS-FACS seminar series at the British Computer Society in London in 2005.BCS-FACS Evening Seminar SeriesBCS-FACS Evening Seminar Series, Past events 2005: nuZ – a wide-spectrum logic for specification and program development
He has been a Fellow of the British Computer Society since 2009Fellows of the BCS: Henson, Martin Charles and holds a Visiting Professorship at the University of Waikato in New Zealand.Staff: Martin Henson (Professor), Department of Computer Science, University of Waikato

==International development==

Henson runs a blog on his activities as Dean at Essex University.Martin Henson blog, Typepad.com.
He has worked internationally on academic accreditation, institutional licensure and strategic planning, with a focus on the Middle East and particularly for the Commission for Academic Accreditation in the United Arab Emirates.External Reviewers: Prof Martin Henson He is an external reviewer for the Oman Academic Accreditation AuthorityExternal Reviewers: Prof Martin Henson in Muscat, Oman, and has been a Fellow of the Royal Society of Arts since 2010.
Professor Henson has given keynote addresses on outcomes-based curriculum development,Outcomes-based Curriculum Development in Saudi Arabia, on institutional research strategic planningThe Strategic Management of Research in Indonesia, and on the internationalisation of higher educationThe Internationalization of Higher Education in China. His other international consultancy has included Jordan, Kuwait, the West Indies, and Sweden.

==Selected publications==

==Books==

==References==

==External links==


