[[Col di Lana]]

CATEGORIES: Mountains of Veneto, Mountains of Italy, Mountains of the Alps, Province of Belluno

The Col di Lana is a mountain of the Fanes Group in the Italian Dolomites, situated in Livinallongo del Col di Lana (German: Buchenstein), a municipality of the Province of Belluno, in the Italian region of Veneto.
During World War I the mountain, alongside the neighbouring Monte Sief, was the scene of heavy fighting between Austria and Italy.  It is now a memorial to the War in the Dolomites.
During the years of 1915/16, Italian troops from 12 infantry and 14 Alpini companies repeatedly attempted to storm the peak, defended first by the German Alpenkorps and later by Austrian regiments.  These attempts resulted in heavy losses; 278 Italians died due to avalanches alone.  On the 8th of November 1915 the Italians, under the command of  Lt. Col. Giuseppe Garibaldi II conquered the summit but then could only mount a weak defence with rag-tag units against a well orchestrated pincer manoeuvre: the top of the Col di Lana fell back to Austrian troops early the next day. A terrible winter then settle in, doing its fair share of killing. However this is not the only reason that the Italians dubbed it "Col di Sangue", "Blood Mountain".  Like all sides in the First World War, the Italian Army sought to conquer the summit with relatively large forces, paying a high price in casualties.
Lieutenant Caetani of the Italian engineers developed a plan for mining the peak, which was executed silently using hand-operating drilling machines and chisels. The Italians had used a similar method to attack Austrians holding one of Mount Tofano's summits, but while most of the Austrian garrison survived the resulting blast, many Italians were killed by falling boulders and afterdamp. At the start of 1916, the Austrians learned through an artillery observer on Pordoi Pass that the summit had been mined.  The Austrians began a counter mine, and exploded this on 5 April 1916.  The counter mine was, however, too far away from the Italian explosive tunnel.  This was laid with five tonnes of blasting gelatin.  On the night of 16/17 April 1916, the 5th Company of the 2nd Tyrolean Kaiserjäger regiment was relieved by the 6th Company, under Oberleutnant Anton von Tschurtschenthaler.  The struggle reached its zenith on the night of 17/18 April 1916, when at around 23:30 the summit was blasted.  The Austrians under Tschurtschenthaler then had to surrender the mountain; however they were able to maintain a position on Monte Sief, which is linked to Col di Lana by a ridge, which was cut in two by a following Austrian mine, thereby obstructing the Italian breakthrough in the area. 
Today a chapel stands on the summit as a memorial to the soldiers that fell in battle. The remains of a barracks and decaying gun and communications trenches have been left behind from the war. There is also a small war museum on the mountain.
The route is from Pieve di Livinallongo (1,465 m) via the Rifugio Pian della Lasta (1,835 m); there is a road as far as the hut.

==References==


