[[Koi Pond (The Office)]]

CATEGORIES: 2009 television episodes, The Office (U.S. season 6) episodes

"Koi Pond" is the 8th episode of the sixth season of the U.S. comedy series The Office and the show's 108th episode overall. It was written by Warren Lieberstein and Halsted Sullivan and directed by Reggie Hudlin. It originally aired on NBC on October 29, 2009.
The series—presented as if it were a real documentary—depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton, Pennsylvania, branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company. In this episode, Michael and Jim head off to a meeting and Michael comes back soaked after having fallen in a koi pond. Meanwhile, Pam and Andy, as the two worst salesmen in the branch, have to go cold calling for sales.

==Synopsis==

Jim sets up a meeting with a client, who requests that Michael come with him. Jim is upset since he wants to be able to do meetings by himself. When they come back from the meeting, Michael is soaked because he fell into a koi pond. The rest of the office makes fun of him. Michael responds by holding a sensitivity meeting where he asks everyone to say things they wish were not said about them. When the meeting doesn't seem to be going anywhere, Jim ends it and tells Michael to let the office see that he has a sense of humor about what happened. Michael does this in front of the office staff, but he gets carried away and admits many other embarrassing stories from his life before realizing he's said too much. Meredith receives a copy of the security tape showcasing Michael's fall, and it is revealed that Jim could have stopped Michael from falling into the koi pond, but deliberately stepped out of the way. Jim admits to Michael that he wished he had gone by himself because he wants to be able to do things by himself as a co-manager; Michael's mood is lifted when he realizes that Jim is jealous of his sales skills. Jim then becomes the victim of office mocking, but he and Michael laugh it off later.
Meanwhile, Pam and Andy go cold calling to drum up more sales as they have the lowest quarterly sales numbers in the branch. At the first place they go to, the receptionist notices Pam's pregnancy and believes Andy is the father. Pam laughs it off, offending Andy. During the meeting, the client also assumes that Andy is the father, and Andy harshly mocks that idea, leaving Pam pissed off and costing them any chance at a sale. At the next place they go to, that client also assumes Andy is the father, and this time they play along with it. However, Andy takes it too far by touching her belly too much, even kissing it, but the client says "maybe" to signing with them. In the car back to the office, Andy admits that he enjoyed pretending to be the father because he doesn't like being single. He then admits his attraction to Erin, who Pam expresses indifference about. At the end of the episode, Pam learns Erin thinks Andy is cool and praises him a little bit.

==Reception==

This episode was watched by 8.2 million viewers, with a 4.2 rating and a 10 share in the 18-49 demographic.Thursday finals: Grey’s Anatomy, The Mentalist, 30 Rock tick up, Parks & Recreation, The Jay Leno Show down

==Trivia==

Creed offering to sell blood to the children is a callback to him stealing blood bags from the episode "Blood Drive".
In the rerun and DVD version, the cold opening was omitted due to the fact that many were offended by Michael hanging himself.

==References==

==External links==


