[[EarthTones]]

CATEGORIES: Charities based in California

EarthTones is a non-profit arts organization committed to raising social consciousness and connecting people across the globe through the power of music and media. The organisation is registered in California as a 501c3 non-profit organization. EarthTones produces and supports the production of emotionally compelling content while partnering with top level talent, like-minded organizations and large scale entertainment platforms to engage, inform and inspire people across the globe.

==Projects==

"Be On Our Way" is the featured song from Tim Story's 2009 film Hurricane Season and part of EarthTones' fundraising and awareness campaign to help victims of Hurricane Katrina. For the song, released by Hip Hop Connect exclusively through the Apple iTunes Store, EarthTones Founder Frank Fitzpatrick brought together a group of like-minded artists - including Grammy Award winner Van Hunt, New Orleans born rapper Supervision, Buku Wise and singers from the original Hidden Faces. 100% of the net proceeds from the sales of "Be On Our Way" go to Brad Pitt's Make It Right Foundation.
"Yoga Revolution: Volume 1"
Yoga Revolution is a compilation CD series, in partnership with Yoga Health Foundation, National Yoga Month, Nutone/Nettwerk Music and Time Life, with proceeds to provide fitness and health education for underserved youth.  The CD was released in conjunction with the annual national campaign for the awareness of the health benefits of yoga. The CD is positioned to reach a broad and popular audience with an accessible collection of inspiring tracks from artists including Sarah McLachlan, Ziggy Marley, Peter Gabriel, Michael Franti, Sheryl Crow, Krishna Das, Anjelique Kidjo, Seal & Guru Singh, Anoushka Shankar & Sting.
Urban Roots is a documentary film from Tree Media (11th Hour) following the urban farming phenomenon in Detroit. Urban Roots is a timely, moving and inspiring work that speaks to a nation grappling with collapsed industrial towns and the need to forge a sustainable and prosperous future. EarthTones' Founder and Detroit native Frank Fitzpatrick composed the score and created the film’s soundtrack.
Beat The World
From the creator of Stomp the Yard, Beat the World is a feature film that tells the story of young people coming from around the globe to compete in an international Hip Hop dance competition held in Detroit. The film’s soundtrack features international collaborations including KRS-One, K’naan, Talib Kweli, Nneka, Ziggy Marley, Les Nubians, and others. A portion of the proceeds from the soundtrack will help support a scholarship fund for underprivileged youth to attend the Debbie Allen Dance Academy.
Yoga for Hope is a nationwide initiative born out of City of Hope's awareness of the vital role complementary and integrative therapies play in healing the whole person. City of Hope seeks to understand the importance of the mind-body-spirit connection to the prevention, treatment and recovery of those battling cancer, diabetes, HIV/AIDS and other life-threatening diseases. In conjunction with the Yoga for Hope 2012 events, EarthTones has created a Limited Edition of their critically acclaimed Yoga Revolution CD: Music for Hope, bringing together world renown artists in support of City of Hope’s Yoga for Hope campaign.
Amazing is an upcoming fiction film from Shanghai Studios, in association with NBA China, expected to reach over 100 million Chinese youth and young adults. On the surface, Amazing is an inspiring contemporary drama about a programmer who has been contracted to design China’s most popular thought-controlled virtual reality basketball game. Amazing supports a series of free NBA Fit clinics throughout China teaching health and fitness to kids and their families. EarthTones Director, Frank Fitzpatrick's theme song for the film, "The Kiss" was performed live by Chinese lead soprano Ying Huang at the opening ceremony of the Shanghai International Film Festival.
A previous work, Just Like You, was created as part of a United Nations-sponsored handicapped awareness and peace initiative using film, songs and music videos. At the heart of the campaign is a multi-lingual song produced by Frank Fitzpatrick. The work included music by Rayess Bek and featured a multi-cultural children’s choir, Pincintu, representing the voices of the future from 17 different countries. The video was produced by the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Disability as part of their ongoing work to help children and handicapped victims of war.
Founder/director, Frank Fitzpatrick, has been working for over 25 years as a successful producer, composer, songwriter and filmmaker.

==External links==


