[[Engineer's Office of the Former Pumping Station]]

CATEGORIES: Yau Ma Tei, Grade I historic buildings in Hong Kong, Water supply and sanitation in Hong Kong, Infrastructure completed in 1895, Water supply pumping stations

The Engineer's Office of the Former Pumping Station, Water Supplies Department ([tpl]zh|t=前水務署抽水站工程師辦公室[/tpl]), sometimes called "The Red Brick House" (紅磚屋), is located at No. 344 Shanghai Street, in Yau Ma Tei, Hong Kong, China. It has been classified as a Grade I historical building since 2000 by the Antiquities Advisory Board in view of its historical and architectural merit.Hong Kong Antiquities and Monuments Office, HKSAR Government. Brief Information on Proposed Grade I Items. pp. 346-347 Retrieved October 13, 2009.Hong Kong Antiquities and Monuments Office, HKSAR Government. List of Graded Historic Buildings in Hong Kong (as at 18 September 2009). Retrieved October 14, 2009 It is now owned by the HKSAR Government.Hong Kong Home Affairs Bureau, HKSAR Government. Government-owned graded historical buildings. Retrieved October 14, 2009.

==History==

The Engineer's Office is the only remaining building of the former Pumping Station (舊水務署抽水站), which was built in 1895. It is the oldest pumping station in Hong Kong, even older than Tai Tam Tuk Pumping Station (大潭篤泵房), which was constructed in 1917.
In 1890, Osbert Chadwick, consulting engineer of the Crown Agents, proposed the building plan for a water supply system in Kowloon. He suggested collecting subterranean water by building underground mud barriers. Although his proposal was not adopted immediately, it contributed to the construction of this pumping station subsequently.
Originally, the pumping station was a complex which comprised three two-storey buildings and a tall chimney for the boiler. The first building consisted an engine house and a boiler house. The second building had a workshop on the ground floor and fitters' quarters on the first floor. Between the first building and the second building was a chimney. For the third building, an office, a store, a boy and coolie room, a cook House and a latrine are the components of the ground floor, while there was overseers' quarters on the first floor.
