[[Badruddin Umar]]

CATEGORIES: Bangladeshi Marxists, Bangladeshi essayists, Bangladeshi political writers, Bangladeshi politicians, Marxist theorists, Living people

Badruddin Umar (Bengali: বদরুদ্দীন উমর born December 20, 1931) was Marxist-Leninist theorist-activist-historian. His father, Abul Hashim,Abul Hashim as a political thinker was prominent politician in Indian Subcontinent.

==Academic beginnings==

He was born in West Bengal. He got his MA in Philosophy from Dhaka University and an Honors degree in PPE (Philosophy, Politics and Economics) from Oxford University.Shrabon Prokashani, author Umar began his academic career as a university teacher at Dhaka University on a temporary basis. In 1963, He joined Rajshahi University as the founder-chair of Political Science department. Then he founded department of Sociology at the same university.Tribute to Badruddin Umar on his seventy-fifth birthday

==Political activities==

As followers of Marxist-Leninist principles, he started to write anti-colonial articles from 70s. In 60s he wrote three notable books––Sampradayikata (Communalism, 1966),Communalism in Undivided Bengal: shrouding Class Conflict with Religion Sanskritir Sankat (The Crisis of Culture, 1967), and Sanskritik Sampradayikata (Cultural Communalism, 1969) shows the dialectics of the political culture of ‘communalism.’   He also gives clear views of Bengali nationalismThe Emergence of Bangladesh which is significant intellectual contributions to the growth of Bengali nationalism itself.  
In 1969, Umar joined at East Pakistan Communist Party (Marxist-Leninist) and in February 1970 to March 1971, Umar edited the mouthpiece of the East Pakistan Communist Party––Saptahik Ganashakti which shows the problems and prospects of communist movements in the Pakistan.
He was president of both Bangladesh Krishak Federation (Bangladesh Peasant Federation) and Bangladesh Lekhak ShibirBanglapedia––the country’s oldest organisation of progressive writers, intellectuals, and cultural activists. Currently he is President of Jatiya Mukti CouncilJatiya Mukti Council calls for lifting of emergency(National Liberation Council).

==Books==

Badruddin Umar has written nearly a hundred books and countless articles. Maximum books show the democratic and socialist transformation of class society. He clearly exposes the Lumpenbourgeoisie’s political culture in Bangladesh. By his books he also contribute in the political economy and culture of capitalism, world socialist movements, communist movements in Bangladesh, the phenomena of militarism and military dictatorships in the Third World, criminalization of politics, business etc. His book Poverty Trade of Dr. Muhammad Yunus  critics micro credit as poverty-business.Shrabon ProkashaniMicro-Credit : myth manufactured

==Bibliography==

==References==

==External links==


