[[Sepeteri]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places in Oyo State

Sepeteri is the biggest town in the Saki East Local Government Area of Oke-Ogun Oyo State, Nigeria. The people of Sepeteri are believed to have migrated from a town called Ifon in Osun State. Sepeteri is located between Igboho and Oje Owode (formerly called "Aha") to Shaki, Ago Are and Iseyin.

==Description==

The title of oba of Sepeteri is Obalufon of Sepeteri. The ruling families are Daodus, Baloguns and Ogboros.Oyo state
Sepeteri is located in between Shaki and Igboho in the Oke-Ogun area, Oyo North Senatorial District of the state of Oyo in Nigeria. Oke-Ogun comprises ten local governments, excluding Ogbomoso. Oke-Ogun area is situated between Oyo and the present Kwara state. The area starts from Iseyin and ends in Bakase, a small town along the boundary of Oyo State and Kwara State.

==People==

The town is homogeneous comprising in the main, people belonging to the Yoruba ethnic group who speak the Yoruba language, although minority groups from elsewhere in Nigeria and Africa are represented. Like all other Yorubas, they claim descent from Oduduwa. The extended family system is important to the Yoruba culture.
Muslims is the majority religion here, with a minority of Christians and those who follow traditional beliefs.

==Economy==

There is mineral availability in the area, such as tantalite, columbite, cassiterite, kaolin, and granite. The Oyo State Government is setting up a lapidary to process the minerals and an international gem stone market in the city of Ibadan where miners can  market their wares.
The town has tourism potential, such as Old Oyo National park, Iyemoja Shrine, Fishing festival, Asabari Hills, Old mining sites.
Agriculture is the major industry in Sepeteri. Apart from the primary roles of providing food and shelter, employment, industrial raw materials, it remains an important source of revenue in the local Government.
The climate favours the growth of food crops like yam, cassava, millet, maize, fruits, rice and plantains. Cash crops such as citrus, tobacco and timber also abound in the state.

==References==


