[[All That Moody]]

CATEGORIES: 1976 albums, Davey Graham albums

All That Moody is an album by British musician Davey Graham, released in 1976. It was his first album in six years after the release of Godington Boundary and is the first with his name spelled Davey instead of Davy.Allmusic entry for All That Moody Retrieved October 2009. It was released on an imprint called Eron Enterprises, a small label based in Deal, Kent, set up 4 years previously to demonstrate how good South East England's folk music scene was. Graham had known Ron Milner, the label's boss, since Holly Gwinn-Graham had been on the label's first release, Folk In Sandwich (ERON 001).
All That Moody was reissued in 1999 on 10" album and CD by Rollercoaster Records, the CD containing six additional tracks.
In his Allmusic review, critic Brian Downing stated "After a six-year sabbatical in which he taught music, Davey Graham came out of retirement to release this retrospective of sorts, All That Moody, in 1976. This collection did contain both his most well-known songs, as well as a few personal favorites, but in re-recorded form. Unlike in the past, where this approach had led to some artistically bankrupt releases that tricked the public into buying what they thought were originals, this effort is a bit different. Sure it gave the under-appreciated artist some more revenue and added a tidy anthology to a rather skimpy and hard-to-find catalog. But it also allowed Graham to give a decidedly Eastern feel to the majority of the numbers present, whereas this raga-fied approach was merely part of his considerable repertoire in the past. With help from Keshav Sathe and Roger Bunn, Graham effectively and impressively showed why he not only is considered the father of the modern British folk movement, but also a real innovator in bringing world music to a traditionally Western form. And while the remakes don't completely render the originals obsolete, they do give listeners some nice alternative versions. The instrumentals, as usual, work best, as Graham's vocals are not his strongest point. Likewise, the numbers that dabble in blues, jazz, or ragtime, while adding a touch of variety, really don't impress as much as the genre-fusing ones. Rollercoaster Records not only released this lost gem in 1999; they added six additional cuts, making this an item any true folk fan should buy on sight." 

==Original track listing==

Side One
Side Two

==Track listing of reissue==

All songs by Davey Graham unless otherwise noted.

==Personnel==

==References==

==External links==


