[[EIF2]]

CATEGORIES: Molecular biology, Protein biosynthesis, Gene expression

Eukaryotic Initiation Factor 2 (eIF2) is a eukaryotic initiation factor. It is required in the initiation of translation. eIF2 mediates the binding of tRNAmet to the ribosome in a GTP-dependent manner. eIF2 is a heterotrimer consisting of an alpha (also called subunit 1), a beta (subunit 2), and a gamma (subunit 3) subunit.
Once the initiation is completed, eIF2 is released from the ribosome bound to GDP as an inactive binary complex. To participate in another round of translation initiation, this GDP must be exchanged for GTP.

==Function==

eIF2 is an essential factor for protein synthesis that forms a ternary complex (TC) with GTP and the initiator Met-tRNA. After its formation, the TC binds the 40S ribosomal subunit to form the 43S preinitiation complex (PIC). PIC-assembly is believed to be stimulated by the initiation factors eIF1, eIF2A, and the eIF3 complex according to in vitro experiments. The 43S PIC then binds mRNA that has previously been unwound by the eIF4s. The 43S PIC and the eIF4 proteins form a new 48S complex on the mRNA, which starts searching along the mRNA for the start codon (AUG). Upon base pairing of the AUG-codon with the Met-tRNA, eIF5 (which is a GTPase-activating protein) is recruited to the complex and induces eIF2 to hydrolyse its GTP. This causes eIF2-GDP to be released from this 48S complex and translation begins after recruitment of the 60S ribosomal subunit and formation of the 80S initiation complex. Finally, with the help of the Guanine nucleotide exchange factor eIF2B,[ref]eIF2B consists of the subunits
EIF2B1, EIF2B2, EIF2B3, EIF2B4, EIF2B5[/ref] the GDP in eIF2 is exchanged for a GTP and the ternary complex reforms for a new round of translation initiation.

==Structure==

eIF2 is a heterotrimer of a total molar mass of 126 kDa that is composed of the three subunits α (subunit 1), β (subunit 2), and γ (subunit 3). 
The sequences of all three subunits are highly conserved (pairwise amino acid identities for each subunit range from 47–72% when comparing the proteins of Homo sapiens and Saccharomyces cerevisiae).
The α-subunit contains the main target for phosphorylation, a serine at position 51. It also contains a S1
motif domain, which is a potential RNA binding-site. Therefore, the α-subunit can be considered the
regulatory subunit of the trimer.
The β-subunit contains multiple phosphorylation sites (residues 2, 13, 67, 218). What is important to consider is that there
are also three lysine clusters in the N-terminal domain (NTD), which are important for the interaction
with eIF2B. Moreover, the sequence of the protein comprises a zinc finger motif that was shown to play a role in both ternary complex and 43S preinitiation complex formation. There are also two guanine nucleotide-binding
sequences that have not been shown to be involved in the regulation of eIF2 activity. The β-subunit is also believed to interact with both tRNA and mRNA.
The γ-subunit comprises three guanine nucleotide-binding sites and is known to be the main docking
site for GTP/GDP. It also contains a tRNA-binding cavity that has been shown by X-ray crystallography. A zinc knuckle motif is able to bind one Zn2+ cation.

==Regulation==

