[[Pig stele of Edessa]]

CATEGORIES: Roman Macedonia, Roman-era Greek inscriptions, Fictional pigs, Religion in ancient Macedonia

The pig stele of Edessa is a Roman-era illustrated Greek funerary  stele from Edessa, Macedonia. The picture of the relief  depicts a man on a four-wheeled chariot with three horses and two pigs, one under the wheel and one under the horse hooves. The inscription reads:

==Text==

==Analysis==

In antiquity, Greek and Latin epitaphs for animals, either real or in jocular fiction, constitute a usual poetic locus. Epigrams of the seventh book of the Greek Anthology mourn on dolphin, cicada, partridge, swallow, jay, ant, grasshopper, rabbit, horse, and the most famous one, on the Maltese watchdog.by Tymnes, 7.211 The funerary relief of Edessa is unique in antiquity and the earliest in history on a pig and a traffic accident.We know only about chariot race accidents in classical antiquity. Hippolytus and Pergamon Museum, c. 300 CE Cf. English-Latin poem: Hic jacet porcus fulgure ictus - On a pig killed in thunder-storm 
Apart from a description of Via Egnatia and the information on Phallic processions, the main subject is the spelling of the word Choiros or choiros in Greek majuscule. Is it about a pig or a man named Choiros? Choirilos  is an already known name and other personal names existed such as Choiron, Choirothyon (pig-sacrificer) Choiridion, Choirine -a,  Choiro, Choiris (female) and around twenty males were named Choiros.Χοιρο- 
In the case of the pig the story may be so: A pig-merchant, who makes business through Via Egnatia, bought pigs from Dalmatia and conveys them on a chariot. Before Edessa, a pig died by the wheel after it fell off the chariot. The merchant or someone else, artist and poet, make the relief and epitaph. As comic or poetic metrical points should be regarded that it travelled on foot alone steadily
or that it longs to see the Dionysiac Phallic processions, if there indeed, pigs were sacrificed.a usual offer to Greek and Roman deities, see pig in religion Another version may be that pigs, bought from Dalmatia, were walking down a road of Edessa, under a priest for the Dionysiac festival, when a chariot or the Phallic chariot crashed one down. This may explain the two depicted pigs.
In the case of a man named Choiros: A slave freed (as an offered gift) at Dalmatia, travels alone through Via Egnatia to his friends or kins. Before Edessa, he died of a chariot accident. Artists, who heard the story and playing with his name, make the relief and poem. In  Christian funerary steles, a certain Pontius Leo had a lion depicted on his epitaph and a little pig was added to that of a child named Porcella.Epitaphs of the catacombs, or, Christian inscriptions in Rome during the first four centuries by James Spencer Northcote Page 175  (1878) 
In a third case, nothing of the above stories happened. The work is made by an artist upon a fictional theme.

==References==


