[[Arno Breitmeyer]]

CATEGORIES: Nazi leaders, German sportspeople, SA personnel, 1903 births, 1944 deaths

Arno Breitmeyer (born 19 April 1903 in Berlin died 20 April 1944) was a German sport official. He began his sports career as a successful competition rower. In 1933 he became editor of the sports section of the Völkischer Beobachter.Early career
Arno Breitmeyer joined the NSDAP in May 1933. He then rose to become an important sports official of the Third Reich. Breitmeyer was first adviser and vicepresident of the Reich Sports Office (DRL/NSRL, Nationalsozialistischer Reichsbund für Leibesübungen) during Hans von Tschammer und Osten's tenure as Reichs Sports Leader.
Arno Breitmeyer was commissioned by von Tschammer to write an extensive illustrated report on the organized sports activities in the Third Reich. Breitmeyer was assisted by Adolf Hitler's personal photographer Heinrich Hoffmann in the venture. The first volume was printed in 1934 by the publishing house of the German Sports Aid Funds. Only volume one and two of a planned series of heavily illustrated four volumes were published. The purpose of this book was to advertise the importance of physical exercise among the National Socialists. This propaganda work has many pictures and information about the various Nazi organizations, i.e. SA, NSKK, Bund Deutscher Mädel, Hitler Jugend, etc.'Sport und Staat
At von Tschammer's death in 1943 Arno Breitmeyer became the leader (Reichssportführer).
There is some controversy regarding Arno Breitmeyer's attitude towards the Nazi regime. Some sources claim that he belonged to the SSSport, Politics and Appeasement in the 1930s (de) and that he was known for his anti-Semitic views.Anti-Semitism at the 1936 Olympics (de) Other sources, however, state that he joined the Nazi party relatively early, displaying Nazi zeal, in order to protect his wife who was of Jewish origin.Attitude towards the regime
Breitmeyer was an Oberregierungsrat candidate to be a member of the Reichstag (MdR, Mitglied des Reichstags) in 1938. At the time of his death in 1944 he was an SA (Sturmabteilung) Brigadeführer, ranked as Generalmajor (the equivalent of major-general in the U.S. Army or a Brigadier-general in the British Army).
Breitmeyer was succeeded as Reichssportführer by Karl Ritter von Halt.

==Works==

==References & External links==


