[[Marco Medel]]

CATEGORIES: 1989 births, Living people, Sportspeople from Santiago, Chilean Primera División players, Chilean footballers, Audax Italiano players, CSD Colo-Colo players

Marco Antonio Medel de la Fuente (born June 6, 1989 in Santiago, Chile) is a Chilean footballer, who in 2007 He does his first apparition for the Chilean team Audax Italiano. He is part of the Chilean National team U-20 that will participate in the South American tournament to be played in Venezuela.  From this tournament, the representatives of South America to the U-20 World Cup will be known.

==Club career==

===Colo-Colo===

During the summer transfer window of 2011 reports began to emerge in late January that a deal had been reached to bring Medel to Colo-Colo in a barter with Audax Italiano that included the goalkeeper Francisco Prieto. On 31 January, it was announced that he completed his move to Colo-Colo in a one-year loan with purchase option, without the barter of Prieto. 
Medel made his competitive debut in a 5–2 loss with Cerro Porteño as a starter, playing the full 90 minutes in a Copa Libertadores match, on 17 February 2011. Despite of his very good talent, he made a poor season, under the coach Américo Gallego, scoring only one goal in a 1–1 draw with Deportes Iquique in eight games that he played during the Apertura Tournament.
In the second semester of 2011, after the departure of Gallego, Medel was more considered in the starting lineup by the interim coach Luis Pérez for the Clausura Tournament.

==International career==

In January 2009, Medel was nominated by the coach Ivo Basay for play in the South American Youth Championship at Venezuela, in this tournament was a key player in the scheme of the coach, but unfortunately Chile was eliminated in the first round.
In July 2009, again was nominated by Basay to the youth national team for play with Chile, now in the Toulon Tournament. Once more Medel was a key player in the team, but now proclaiming champion of this tournament along with his teammates.
On 2 September 2011, Medel was called up by the coach Jaime Vera for play in the national team against Mexico at the Alfonso Lastras Ramírez Stadium. He played in a U-25 team that was tested for find alternatives in the adult team for the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification. The match played against Mexico was won 3–1.

==External links==


