[[Irenäus Eibl-Eibesfeldt]]

CATEGORIES: 1928 births, Living people, Austrian underwater divers, Austrian zoologists, Commanders Crosses of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany, Recipients of the Bavarian Order of Merit, Recipients of the Austrian Cross of Honour for Science and Art, 1st class, Ethologists, Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich faculty, Scientists from Vienna, Pioneering scientific divers, University of Vienna alumni, Members of the European Academy of Sciences and Arts

Irenäus Eibl-Eibesfeldt (born June 15, 1928) is founder of the field of human ethology. In authoring the book which bears that title, he applied ethology to humans by studying them in a perspective more common to volumes studying animal behavior.
Born in Vienna, Austria, Eibl-Eibesfeldt studied  Zoology at the University of Vienna 1945-1949. From 1946 to 1948 he was research associate at the Biological Station Wilhelminenberg near Vienna and became research associate of the Institute for Comparative Behavior Studies in Altenberg near Vienna with Konrad Lorenz in 1949. Between 1951 to 1969 he worked at the Max Planck Institute for Behavioral Physiology (first in Westphalia, from 1957 at Seewiesen, Bavaria). In 1970 he became Professor for Zoology at the University of Munich. Since 1975 he has been the head of the Max Planck Institute for Behavioral Physiology, Department of Human Ethology in Andechs, Germany. He was the co-founder and first president of the International Society for Human Ethology. Since 1992 he has been Honorary Director of the Ludwig-Boltzmann-Institute for Urban Ethology in Vienna.
In the first twenty years of his work as an animal ethologist he investigated experimentally and descriptively the development of behavior of mammals and  compared the behavior of communication of vertebrates. His is the author of many books like Love and Hate: The Natural History of Behavior Patterns.
He married Eleonore Eibl-Eibesfeldt in 1950.  They have two children, Bernolf and Roswitha.
For many years he dived with Hans Hass on his diving boat Xarifa.http://www.thehds.com/publications/hassbib.html

==Decorations and awards==

==References==

==External links==


