[[Lawrence Power]]

CATEGORIES: 1977 births, Living people, Alumni of the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, British classical violists, People educated at the Royal Grammar School, High Wycombe

Lawrence Power is a British violist, born 1977,Some sources give 1978 noted both for solo performances and for chamber music with the Nash Ensemble and Leopold String Trio.Colorado Britten Society Newsletter, Vol 1:2 January 2003.

==Career==

Power started out as a violist (rather than beginning studies on the violin and switching to viola) at his primary school aged eight. When 11, Power entered the Junior Department of the Guildhall School of Music and Drama in London studying with Mark Knight. Later Power spent a year at the Juilliard School with Karen Tuttle.All things strings. Lawrence Power profile http://www.stringsmagazine.com/article/default.aspx?articleid=23002
After a year in New York, Power returned to London and won first prize in the Primrose International Viola Competition in 1999. Following a third prize at the 2000 Maurice Vieux International Viola Competition in Paris, he made his first recording (Ligeti, Roslavets, Takemitsu and Prokofiev).Nash Ensemble programme, Wigmore Hall London, 14 November 2009.
In 2001 Power was selected to become a BBC Radio 3 New Generation Artist until 2003.
Power is a visiting professor at the Royal College of Music in London and has given master classes at the Verbier Festival.
In 2003 Power was head-hunted to become the leader of the viola section of Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra, but despite playing with them in Mahler’s 3rd Symphony at the Barbican under Haitink he did not audition for the position.Joking apart. Interview with Lawrence Power. The Guardian, Friday August 15, 2008.
Since his London solo debut with The Philharmonia, he has performed in the UK and abroad, appearing as soloist with many orchestras such as the London Symphony, BBC Symphony, English Chamber, Scottish Chamber, Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, Bergen Philharmonic, Royal Stockholm Philharmonic, Verbier Festival Chamber, New Zealand Symphony, Lucerne Festival Strings and Symphonieorchester des Bayerischen Rundfunks.
At the Proms, he has played the Mozart Sinfonia concertante (with Maxim Vengerov) in 2006, the Walton Viola Concerto in 2007, Vaughan Williams's Flos Campi in 2008, and he took part in a chamber music Prom in 2009.
Power has a prominent career as a chamber musician, as violist in the Nash Ensemble and the Leopold String Trio. He has made guest appearances at international music festivals such as Edinburgh, Aldeburgh, Verbier, Vancouver, and Oslo.
Lawrence Power plays an instrument by Antonio Brensi of Bologna from c.1610.

==Discography==

==Notes==


