[[Carl Safran]]

CATEGORIES: 1917 births, 2005 deaths, People from Calgary, Canadian Jews, University of Alberta alumni, University of Colorado alumni

Carl Safran B.Sc. MEd Ed.D. LL.D. (1917–2005) was Alberta's first school psychologist and began the Special Education system in the province.  As the Chief Superintendent of the Calgary Board of Education, he was instrumental in bringing mentally challenged children into the public school system.   He authored several key educational textbooks and culture-induced intelligence tests that are still in use throughout the world today.  Considered to be an articulate, compelling speaker, he was a guest lecturer at a variety of  notable universities.   He is survived by his widow, Mercia (née Weitzman) and his two daughters, Jaclyn and Laura Safran.

==Biography==

A descendant of 13 generations of rabbis, Carl Safran was the second son of immigrant parents, Jacob and Etta Safran, who emigrated from Belarus to Calgary in 1912.
Having obtained a Bachelor of Science in 1941 from the Montana School of Mines (renamed Montana Tech of the University of Montana),  Carl Safran began his career as a mining engineer.  When World War II broke out, Carl Safran served overseas with the Canadian Army Engineering Corp.  During that time, he discovered his passion for teaching while giving physics lessons to fellow soldiers.
Upon his return from the war, Carl Safran enrolled at the University of Alberta, where he obtained his Master of Education.  Upon completion of that degree, he enrolled at the University of Colorado, where he obtained a Doctorate in Education.
In 1972, Carl Safran was appointed as the Chief Superintendent of the Calgary Board of Education.  He helped develop Canada's first learning centre for children with mental and physical disabilities (Christine Meikle School).   According to his widow, Mercia, her husband got a big kick out of the fact that, as a young boy, he had been kicked out of school for six weeks of truancy, yet later went on to become a leading figure in education.
On the day of Carl Safran's death, the then Chief Superintendent of schools, Dr. Brendan Croskery requested that all Calgary Board of Education schools fly their Canadian flags at half mast. In his letter to the schools, Dr. Croskery referred to Carl Safran as a highly respected pioneer in the field of educating children with special learning needs. His longstanding coommitment to public education earned him many honors and awards.  According to Dr. Croskery, "Dr. Safran was not just a former Chief Superintendent of the Board of Education, but a man of extraordinary vision and compassion for some of the most vulnerable members of our society. Through these qualities he left an enduring legacy of excellence and hope that made him one of Alberta's great heroes of public education."

==Awards==

==Selected works By Carl Safran==

==References==


