[[Artayctes]]

CATEGORIES: 479 BC deaths, People executed by crucifixion, Persian people of the Greco-Persian Wars, Achaemenid military leaders, Year of birth unknown, 5th-century BC people

Artaÿctes is a historical figure described in Herodotus' The Histories. Artayctes, the son of Cherasmis, was a Persian General who commanded the Macrones and Mossynoeci forces in the army of Xerxes during the second Persian invasion of Greece (480-479 BC). During that period, Artayctes was also a Tyrant in Sestos where he was captured and crucified by Athenian forces in 479 BC.

==Background==

After the defeat of the Persian army in the Battle of Plataea and the Battle of Mycale, the remaining Persians and their allies made for Sestos, the strongest town in the Thracian Chersonesos. The Greek fleet sailed to the Hellespont to destroy the pontoon bridges placed there by the Persians when they had crossed from Asia Minor to Greece, but found that this had already been done. The Peloponnesians then sailed home, but the Athenians, commanded by Xanthippus, decided to try to retake the Thracian Chersonesos from the Persians. The Athenian army landed on the Thracian Chersonesos near Sestos and surrounded the city, of which Artayctes was governor.

==Artayctes's rule as governor of Sestos==

According to Herodotus, Artayctes's rule over the city-state of Sestos was a reign of terror. Originally, Sestos had been a Greek stronghold. Herodotus describes that when Artayctes was made governor of the city, he claimed all treasures present in the region, and desecrated many Greek places of worship. For example, Artayctes plundered the Sestos cemetery near Elaeus and built a Persian temple complex on top of it.

==The Siege of Sestos==

Herodotus describes that Artayctes was taken by surprise by the arrival of the Athenian military forces. By surrounding the city of Sestos, the Athenians had trapped Artayctes in his own capital, and with him the equipment needed to build a new pontoon bridge. After the siege had lasted several months, little progress in retaking the city had been made, and the Athenian soldiers became somewhat discontented. However, the Athenian officers were determined to take the city. 
The Athenian siege dragged on, but eventually, when the food ran out in the city, the Persians fled at night through the least guarded part of the city wall. The Athenians were thus able to take possession of the city the next day.

==Artayctes's death==

According to Herodotus, the Athenian army was informed by the inhabitants of Sestos about the departure of the Persians. The Athenians subsequently pursued the Persians. They encountered Artayctes and his military unit near the river Geite. Most of Artayctes's men were killed in the subsequent battle. Artayctes, however, was captured and taken back to Sestos.
Herodotus describes how Artayctes pleaded for his life and for the life of his son. He offered a hundred talents to the gods and two hundred to the Athenians if they would spare their lives.
However, the Greek general Xanthippus was obliged to hand over Artayctes to the people of Elaeus, a town which Artayctes had plundered while governor of Sestus. Artayctes was then crucified by the people. While Artayctes was dying, he witnessed his son being stoned to death.

==References==


