[[Family Inada]]

CATEGORIES: Manufacturing companies of Japan, Robotics companies, Companies based in Osaka Prefecture

Family Inada (Inada) is a Japanese manufacturer of robotic massage chairs. Based in Osaka, Japan, Inada was founded in 1962 by Nichimu InadaPopular Science: Stress Relief: The Masseuse You Sit On and invented the first automatic shiatsu massage chair.Home Theater Magazine: Home Theater Masseuse Mr. Meishoku Kim is Inada's director of development.New York Times: Massaging To the Oldies
Much of their technological development comes from a secretive skunk works located in their main headquarters in Osaka. The main factory is located in Nawa, a small town located in the Tottori prefecture of Japan.
In 2001 Inada released the i.1 and the H.9 massage chairs.New York Times: A Digital Chair That Can Sense And Relieve the Pain The H.9, which uses infrared sensors to profile a user's body to determine the location of acupressure points, was a TIME Magazine Invention of the Year TIME Magazine 2001 Inventions of the Year and became a bestseller in Japan.CNN on the Inada H.9, January 10, 2003 In 2003 the D.1 was released to critical acclaim,TIME Magazine: Technology: Sitting Pretty and in 2008 Inada released the Sogno DreamWave, designed by Toshiyuki Kita.
The Sogno DreamWave (HCP-10001A) received 2009 Consumer Electronics Show (CES) Innovation Honors2009 Consumer Electronics Show (CES) Innovation Honors and was a 2009 American Society of Furniture Designers (ASFD) Pinnacle Award finalist. In 2010, Inada received two additional CES Innovations Honors for the Inada CUBE Inada CUBE in the Home Appliance CategoryCES 2010 Innovations Honors Home Appliances and the Doctor's Choice massage chair Doctor's Choice (HCP-9101A) in the Health and Wellness Category.CES 2010 Innovations Honors Health and Wellness Category
For fans of NBC's "30 Rock," the Sogno DreamWave was character Tracy Jordan's recliner in Season 4 (2009–2010) of the show.

==Distribution==

Family Inada is distributed in the United States by FIUS Distributors LLC dba Inada Massage Chairs (Boulder, Colorado, United States) marketed under the name Inada USA ( www.InadaUSA.com ) and in Canada by Bodo Wellness Technology (Calgary, Alberta, Canada). In total, Inada claims to be distributed in over 60 countries worldwide.
In the U.S., the chairs are sold through a network of authorized dealers and online at www.DreamWaveChair.com. Inada USA currently offers two models, the Sogno DreamWave and the Yu•Me.

==References==

==External links==


