Class was also manager of another sixties group, the Psychedelic pop group The World Of Oz. Class who had even set the group up in a luxury Park Lane apartment allmusic [[tpl]Allmusic|class=artist|id=p42468/biography|pure_url=yes[/tpl] The World of Oz biography  made a serious mistake of leaving this group in the hands of Michael Levy while he went to the United States with the Foundations. With the World Of Oz left in Levy's charge, Levy almost immediately cut their publicity budget which cost the group their slot in Top of the Pops.Marmalade Skies Website World Of Oz The momentum that had been built up over the months had now stalled their single "Muffin Man" in the UK as a result of Levy's attempt at budgeting.Answers.com The World of Oz

==Other groups==

Other groups (acts) managed by Class were The Flirtations who also gained entry into the top 50 charts with their first record and Clyde McPhatter the original lead singer of the Drifters all of whom were introduced to Class by Rod Harrod. Rare Amber was a unique British country band whose records are still sought after to this day from as diverse as fans from Sweden, Netherlands, and Germany.
Groups represented by the Class Agency included Warm Dust and the Greatest Show on Earth.

==Multimedia==

Class went on to create a sixteen studio complete multimedia complex in Hollywood where he created the very first full screen MPEG image interactive CD-ROM for interactive music and video, working on a basic 2 x disc drive and basic PC in 1994. This technology was later to become integrated into online JPEG and movies.

==Property Development==

Class's property development interests which started in London in the early 60's with his North Thames Development Company specializing in urban renewal projects in Earls Court and later West Hampstead, took a turn overseas to the Seychelles Islands and Balearic Islands. In 1979 Class started his redevelopment projects in Santa Monica, California, with serious urban renewal of the Santa Monica Mall. His efforts led to his being one of the two leading pioneers responsible for the complete rehabilitation of the area which after became renamed the Third Street Promenade, which is still the only European style public open space with cinemas, shopping and street-dining space in Los Angeles, a few blocks from the ocean. The Santa Monica project showed what Class could achieve with the help and cooperation of the local Chamber of Commerce and a progressive City Council who all agreed to become proactive in the revitalization of a depressed old shopping area to make it one of the most popular shopping and leisure areas for eating out and movie houses for first run releases. 
Class’s real estate projects include Puerto Vallarta, Mexico; Point Dume, Malibu; Hollywood Boulevard Studios Complex 1,  Los Angeles; Santa Monica Studio Complex 2; Galleries Gourmet, Santa Monica Mall;  Rainbow Mall, Santa Monica; Shopping Center Dana Point, Orange County;  The Auditorium, Hollywood Boulevard; Touch of Class Antique Mall, W. LA; The Market Place, Venice beach, California;
Urban renewal and revitalization of old and underused property assets has always been Class’s first and main interest coupled with his love of music and new cutting edge music and multimedia opportunities.

==Cigars –Plantations==

In 1994 Class went exploring into the Philippines and Sumatra to hunt down a lost old Spanish Mission Havana leaf plantation which was found,  Class and a Filipino American partner developed into a hugely successful boutique cigar brand, Hannibal Cigars which was headquartered in Beverly Hills, California.

==References==


