[[National Book Trust of Uganda]]

CATEGORIES: Organisations based in Uganda

The National Book Trust of Uganda (NABOTU) is a non-government organization that brings together associations and institutions within Uganda’s book sector to promote authorship, publishing and a culture of reading in Uganda.

==History==

NABOTU was set up in 1997 to promote authorship, publishing and the development of a culture of reading in Uganda. It was the successor body to the Uganda Publishers and Booksellers Association (UPABA) which had been formed in the early 1990s as a forum for promoting a good policy environment for Uganda’s publishing industry. At the time of the formation of NABOTU, Uganda had started to embrace an open and competitive publishing environment following the adoption of the textbook policy in 1998. The textbook policy which allows 5 different titles for every school subject marked the emergence of a local publishing industry in Uganda which hitherto was dominated by multinational publishers.
In 2000, NABOTU was one of the founding book councils together with the National Book Development Council of Kenya (NBDCK) and Baraza Ya Maendeleo Vitabu Tanzania (BAMVITA) of the East African Book Development Association (EABDA).  Under the EABDA outfit with the support of Sida, Book Aid International and Hivos, NABOTU has been implementing the East Africa Book Development Programme. The goal of the programme is the eradication of poverty through literacy enhancement. The programme has several projects including Children’s Reading Tents;  support to school library development; rural community library development; annual National Book Week Festivals; skills development for book sector professionals like authors, publishers, booksellers, etc.;  literary awards; book donations and advocacy on issues like textbook policy, national book policy, book trade, copyright, right to write and read, etc.
NABOTU has  recently expanded the programme with the support of the International Federation of Reprographic Rights Organisations (IFRRO) and IDRC to include copyright management and research on new publishing innovations such as flexible copyright licensing.

==Programmes==

The East African Book Development Programme whose goal is the eradication of poverty through literacy enhancement is currently being implemented in Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania. The programme creatively engages the target groups to embrace a culture of reading through different activities including;

==Copyright and publishing innovations==

The programme seeks to broaden understanding of copyright law by authors, publishers, legal advisors and all rightsholders and users.
Following the enactment of the Uganda Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Act 2006, there has been increasing pressure from copyright holders to put in place systems that facilitate enforcement. NABOTU is supporting the establishment of the Uganda Reproduction Rights Organisation  (URRO) as a collective management organization for its rightsholders.  If established, URRO will follow the successful path in rights management and enforcement already set by the Uganda Performing Rights Society (UPRS) in the music industry.
NABOTU is involved in researching the adoption of open access publishing by commercial publishers, research institutes and NGOs as a means of improving access to learning materials in Uganda. This is under the Publishing and Alternative Licensing Models for Africa (PALM Africa) project funded by IDRC currently being implemented in Uganda and South Africa.  A publishing experiment involving two commercial publishers i.e. Fountain Publishers Ltd and Mastermind Ltd and; an NGO the Uganda Women Writers Association (FEMRITE) is experimenting with web based published books issued under a creative commons license exploring usage as per the number of downloads and quotations, orders for physical copies of the books and new business models adopted .

==Members of NABOTU==

==References==

==External links==


