[[Shihab Dehlvi]]

CATEGORIES: 1922 births, 1990 deaths, Indian poets

Syed Masood Hassan (October 20, 1922 (13-2-1341 AH) – August 29, 1990), known by the pen name Shihab Dehlvi, was an Indo-Pakistan poet.

==Biography==

He was born in Delhi, India. His father's name was Syed Manzoor Hassan Rizvi. He received a Bachelor of Arts degree.[tpl]Where|date=July 2011[/tpl]
He was tutored in poetry by Khayam-Ul-Hind Haider Dehlvi. 
He married on May 4, 1947. His children were Shahood Rizvi, Mashood Rizvi, Shahid Rizvi, Zahid Rizvi, Abid Rizvi, Saeeda Ali, Rashida Mansur and Ghazala Kamal.His son Dr. Shahid Hassan Rizvi is working as Chairman of the History Department of Islamia University Bahwalpur at Bughdad ul Jadeed Campus. 
He served as an army education instructor in Delhi in 1940, and as an information officer in Lahore in 1958.
He edited Ilham in Delhi from May 1940 to August 1947. 
In October 1947, he migrated Pakistan.He died in Bahawalpur, Pakistan, in 1990.

==Publications==

==Shihab Academy==

After the death of Shihab Dehlvi his students and followers in order to continue his literary mission founded "Shihab Academy" and made his student the famous poet and writer Mr. Tabish Alwari its president. Amongst its aim is to make known and spreads the thoughts of Shihab dehlvi by compiling his unpublished writings are a priority. For the achievements of his aim Shihab Academy despite its limited funds is struggling hard. Every year a seminar is held in which intellectuals and scholars are invited from all parts of the country, who deliver lectures on literary and scholarly subjects. The work of compiling of unpublished writings of Shihab Dehlvi is also progressive. In this way different scholars commented upon his poetry, research and literary work. At this time two books have been published that is Asman-e- Takhleeq Ka Shihab written by Dr. Tahir Taunswi a great scholar, poet and critic. Another book Shihab Dehlvi kay shairey Rawiay has been written by Qudrat Ullah Shehzad in which the poetry of Shihab Dehlvi has been analyzed in the light of various subjects.
Amongst his unpublished writings the book Meithei Batain is under publishing. These are those poems for children that Shihab Dehlvi had written in his childhood. In fact it is a presentation of world of children in verse. There are hundreds of other published and unpublished papers which are awaiting research.
Research thesis on Shihab Dehlvi have been written on M.A, M- Phil and PhD levels whose publication is also a part of Academy programme.
Few books are also published which tribute Mr. Shihab Dehlvi. i.e. Jahan-e-Takhleeq ka Shihab, Shihab Dehlvi k Shir-e rawiye.
Apart from Shihab Academy the institution Maktaba Ilham established by Shihab Dehlvi is also being gained the respect of the literary and religious circles. Now Maktaba Ilham have been merged in Shihab Academy. Consequently monthly Ilham also been published by Shihab Academy. Rather the books of maktaba Ilham will also be published under the auspices of Shihab Academy

==Awards==

In recognition of Shihab Dehlvi social services president Ayub Khan honoured him with a certificate and a license free pistol.[tpl]clarify|date=July 2012[/tpl]
In 1998 on the occasion of the centenary celebration of "Jashn-e-Fareed" Islamia University Bahawalpur awarded a Gold Medal to Shihab dehlvi ranking him the foremost research scholar on Khawaja Fareed. His elder son Shahood Rizvi received this medal.
Mustahiq Tu Hum Bhee Thay Azaz -O- Manseb Kay "Shihab"
Es Jehan–E–Kar Ferma Main Koee Apna Na Tha.
In the literary, cultural, social and the political life of Bahawal Pur the position of "Shihab Dehlvi" is like a core centre.
"Husain Sahar"

==The message of Shihab Dehlvi==

For serving one's nation it is necessary to remember our benefactors. Our benefactors are great figures of historical heritage. If this attitude of neglect remains as such towards our well wisher, men of generous and literary personalities. Then who will have the courage to serve the nation. It is necessary to thaw this mountain of coldness. An effort should be made to keep afresh these forgotten memories. Which is the wealth of our historical national accomplishments, so that the movement of practical work may continue.
With Prayers
Shihab Dehlvi

==External links and references==


