[[Jimmy Rae]]

CATEGORIES: 1958 deaths, Scottish footballers, Partick Thistle F.C. players, Plymouth Argyle F.C. players, Scottish football managers, Plymouth Argyle F.C. managers, The Football League managers, People from Aberdeenshire, King's Park F.C. players, Association football fullbacks, Scotland youth international footballers, Year of birth missing

James Clarkson Rae (born in Aberdeenshire) was a Scottish professional footballer and manager who most famously played for and then became manager of English Football League club Plymouth Argyle. He was a full back and also represented Partick Thistle.

==Playing career==

Jimmy Rae was one of eleven players who both ran out for and managed Plymouth Argyle. His date of birth is unknown, but his career as a professional football player began when he was 17 years old, signing for King's Park as a left-footed full back. He joined Partick Thistle in 1927 and went on to make over 100 appearances in all competitions for them. Most notably in the 1929–30 Scottish Cup Final, which was won by Rangers after a replay at Hampden Park.Plymouth Argyle Managers
His performances for Thistle made him a target for the Glasgow giants, but Plymouth Argyle manager Bob Jack secured Rae's services in 1932 when Partick played a benefit match at Home Park. He made his debut in August 1932 and immediately became a first-team regular. He went on to make 249 League appearances and ten FA Cup appearances, missing only a handful of games in seven years with the club, where he made up an all-Scottish left side with Archie Gorman and Sammy Black. Rae played for Scotland Schoolboys and caught the attention of the Scotland national team selectors on many occasions during his professional career, being called up to the stand-by list three times, but he never won a full international cap. When war intervened in 1939, Rae continued to play for Argyle in wartime competitions.

==Managerial career==

When hostilities had ended in 1945 he was appointed as assistant to Argyle manager Jack Tresadern as the Football League resumed. He took over as Plymouth Argyle manager in November 1947, a position he held for eight years. He won the Third Division South title in 1952 and led the club to their joint highest League finish of 4th in the Second Division the following year.Third Division 1951-52Second Division 1952-53 He was relieved of his duties as manager mid-way through the 1954–55 season due to downturn in results, but left a lasting legacy as one of the club's best managers. He was responsible for signing players of the calibre of Jack Chisholm, Neil Dougall and Gordon Astall.Argyle in America

==Later life and death==

Following his dismissal, he left Plymouth to manage a pub in Solihull, but died in July 1958.

==Honours==

Football League Third Division South

==References==

==External links==


