[[Solved game]]

CATEGORIES: Mathematical games, Abstract strategy games, Combinatorial game theory

A solved game is a game whose outcome (win, lose, or draw) can be correctly predicted from any position, given that both players play perfectly. Games which have not been solved are said to be "unsolved". Games for which only some positions have been solved are said to be "partially solved".  This article focuses on two-player games that have been solved.
A two-player game can be "solved" on several levels:[ref]V. Allis, Searching for Solutions in Games and Artificial Intelligence. PhD thesis, Department of Computer
Science, University of Limburg, 1994. Online: pdf[/ref]H. Jaap van den Herik, Jos W.H.M. Uiterwijk, Jack van Rijswijck, Games solved: Now and in the future, Artificial Intelligence 134 (2002) 277–311.
A minimax algorithm can exhaustively traverse the game tree of any two-person game that has finitely many positions.  For many non-trivial games this algorithm would require too much time to generate a move in a given position; a game therefore is not considered to be weakly or strongly solved unless existing hardware can reasonably quickly run the algorithm. Many algorithms rely on a huge database and are effectively nothing more.
For example of a strong solution consider the game of tic-tac-toe, which is solvable as a draw for both players with perfect play (a result even manually determinable by schoolchildren). Games like nim also admit a rigorous analysis using combinatorial game theory.
Even a strongly solved game can remain interesting if its solution is too complex to be memorized; conversely, a weakly solved game may lose its attraction if the winning strategy is simple enough to remember (e.g. Maharajah and the Sepoys). An ultra-weak solution (e.g. Chomp or Hex on a sufficiently large board) generally does not affect playability.

==Perfect play==

In game theory, perfect play is the behavior or strategy of a player that causes the best possible outcome for that player regardless of the response by the opponent.  Based on the rules of a game, every possible final position can be evaluated (as a win, loss or draw). By backward reasoning, one can recursively evaluate a non-final position as identical to that of the position that is one move away and best valued for the player whose move it is. Thus a transition between positions can never result in a better evaluation for the moving player, and a perfect move in a position would be a transition between equally evaluated positions. As an example, a perfect player in a drawn position would always get a draw or win, never a loss. If there are multiple options with the same outcome, perfect play is sometimes considered the fastest method leading to a good result, or the slowest method leading to a bad result.
Perfect play can be generalized to non-perfect information games, as the strategy that would guarantee the highest minimal expected outcome regardless of the strategy of the opponent. As an example, the perfect strategy for Rock, Paper, Scissors would be to randomly choose each of the options with equal (1/3) probability. The disadvantage in this example is that this strategy will never exploit non-optimal strategies of the opponent, so the expected outcome of this strategy versus any strategy will always be equal to the minimal expected outcome.
Although the optimal strategy of a game may not (yet) be known, a game-playing computer might still benefit from solutions of the game from certain endgame positions (in the form of endgame tablebases), which will allow it to play perfectly after some point in the game. Computer chess programs are well known for doing this.

==Solved games==

==Partially solved games==

==See also==

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==


