[[Barry Class]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing, Year of death missing, British music managers, Real estate and property developers, The Foundations

Barry Class was a property tycoon and owner of the Disci record shop chain in the UK. He became the manager of the Multi-racial group The Foundations who are known for the hits "Baby, Now That I've Found You" and "Build Me Up Buttercup".allmusic The Foundations biography

==Foundations==

Class's association with the Foundations came about by his renting out the basement below his shop to a group of men who had set up a coffee club. Intrigued by the sounds coming from below he went to investigate. The eight men who were running the coffee club turned out to be the Foundations.Google Books Billboard 26 Apr 1969 - Page 43
There is some debate as to who actually first discovered the Foundations. Some sources point to Ron Fairway as being the one who first discovered them and introduced them to Class. Others of course point to Class as being the one who discovered the group. although in fact it was The Foundations' lead singer Clem Curtis who first approached Sylvia Class in their Disc record shop opposite the groups rehearsal basement in the Class office building. Curtis invited Sylvia to ask her husband Barry Class to come down to see and listen to the group as they were rehearsing in his building. Ron Fairway was nowhere in sight at that time.
The result of Class meeting the Foundations was his taking them to PYE records Google Books Billboard 26 Apr 1969 - Page 60 and from there the Foundations had a no 1 hit with their debut single "Baby, Now That I've Found You". 
Class became their manager with his wife Sylvia taking care of the band's promotion on radio and television.Google Books Billboard 26 Apr 1969 - Page 41 
Ron Fairway became Class's partner in managing the Foundations. Not long after the Foundations had their hit with their debut single, there was a behind the scenes bid for power and Fairway was ousted. He attempted to stir things up by spreading a rumour that the Foundations had broken up, but this only added to the group's publicity. 

The Foundations broke away from Barry Class in late 1969. The brothers running Class' Booking agency, Mike Dolan and Jim Dawson induced them to leave...their publicist Rod Harrod remained with Class.
After an attempt to relaunch the Foundations failed career after their earlier split, in 1971, Rod Harrod under the auspices of Class International organized a South American tour to Argentina, Uruguay and Brazil with only Colin Young from the previous line-up. 
The reformed group became one of the finalists in the European Song Contest to represent the United Kingdom with the Buttercup lead singer Colin Young and half of the original band which also subsequently failed to hold it together.

==The World Of Oz==

