[[The Strombo Show]]

CATEGORIES: Canadian talk radio programs, Canadian music radio programs, Rock music radio programs, CBC Radio 2 programs

The Strombo Show is a Canadian radio show, hosted by George Stroumboulopoulos, which has aired since 2005.
The show originated on Standard Broadcasting's CFRB in Toronto and CJAD in Montreal as a light-hearted news-oriented talk show. In November 2007, the show moved to the Corus network and the format changed, with a focus on music. The Strombo Show broadcast from 102.1 The Edge's Toronto studio and on other radio stations in the Corus Entertainment network, including CFOX-FM in Vancouver, Power 97 in Winnipeg, FM96 in London and Y108 in Hamilton. On the Corus network, the show aired for three hours on Sunday nights, combining music, celebrity guests and calls from listeners.
The show moved to CBC Radio 2 in November 2009."Strombo Reveals Details Of New CBC Radio Show". chartattack.com, November 6, 2009. In an interview with ChartAttack, Stroumboulopoulos acknowledged that being on a public radio network gives him more flexibility to choose music without genre limitations than the Corus version of his show, which aired on modern rock and active rock stations, did."Strombo's Holy Trinity: The Clash, Public Enemy, George Carlin". chartattack.com, November 8, 2009.

==CBC Radio 2==

Every Sunday night on CBC Radio 2, the show follows a freeform format, airing contemporary music personally chosen by Stroumboulopoulos,
Each show features a conversation and live acoustic performance from various guests that has dropped by the "broom closet". Past guests include Vampire Weekend, Slash, The National, Patti Smith, Band of Horses, Greg Graffin of Bad Religion, White Lung, Joel Plaskett, Ziggy Marley, Buddy Guy, Raine Maida and Jeremy Taggart of Our Lady Peace, Maestro Fresh Wes, K-Os, Grapes of Wrath, Stars, Arkells, Bahamas, Propagandhi, Rich Kidd, Saint Alvia, SonReal, The Wooden Sky, Three Days Grace, Hollerado, Jarvis Church, D-Sisive, Saul Williams, Sugarhill Gang, Corb Lund, Diamond Rings, Dan Mangan and more.
Other regular features of the show include a 'Nod to the Gods' segment at the top of each show that celebrates important forces in music and the Magnificent Seven countdown highlights the seven best new tracks of the week, as determined by Stroumboulopoulos - its namesake also serves as a testament to The Clash. The Strombo Show pays tribute to Tom Waits' music on Ten With Tom and there is 'The Blend' - a 15-minute mix from some of Canada's best DJ's that have included DJ Carisma, Tom Wrecks, DJ M-Rock, DJ Mensa, Grahmzilla, DJ Marvel and DJ Grouch.
Regular contributors that join Stroumboulopoulos for light-hearted conversation around music include Lana Gay of CBC Radio 3, Bob Mackowycz, Jr. and Eric Alper.

==References==

==External links==


