[[Pedavadlapudi]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Guntur district

Pedavadlapudi పెద్దవడ్లపూడి is a village in the Guntur district of Andhra Pradesh, India. Pedavadlapudi is 4.8 km from its Mandal Main Town Mangalagiri, 20.5 km from its District Main City Guntur, and 249 km distance from its State Main City Hyderabad.
Other villages in the Mangalagiri Mandal are Atmakur, Bethapudi, Chinavadlapudi, Krishanayapalam, Kuragallu, and Neerukonda.
Near By Villages of this Village with distance are Ippatam (2.7 km), Chiluvuru (3.4 km), Tummapudi(3.8 km), Revendrapadu (3.9 km), Srungarapuram (3.9 km). Nearby towns are Mangalagiri (4.8 km), Duggirala (8.7 km), Tadepalle (9.3 km), Pedakakani (12 km).
Pedavadlapudi's pin code is 522302 and the village's post office name is Pedavadlapoodi.

==Population==

The population in Pedavadlapudi village is 12,600. Out of the total respondents covered under the study, 20% are in the age group of 20 – 40 years, 60% is in the age group of 40 – 60 years and 20% is in the age group of above 60 years.
In Pedavadlapudi village, 70% belongs to 1st – 10th standard, 5% are technical and the remaining 25% are graduates. As regards the occupational status 70% farmers, 20% business and the remaining 10% belongs to other categories of professions.
In Pedavadlapudi 10% are landless and are engaged as agricultural labour on daily wages. The annual income varies from Rs. 10,000 to Rs. 50,000. 20% have less than two acres of land and an average production of paddy and other commercial crops is about 25 – 30 bags/year/acre for two seasons (two crops). The annual income varies from Rs. 70,000 to Rs. 100,000. 50% have 2–5 acres of agriculture land and they get an average production of commercial crops depends on seasonal variation. The remaining 20% have 5 – 10 acres of agriculture land and the average annual income is about Rs. 300,000 depends on the average annual production of paddy and commercial crops. The average annual production is also influenced by seasonal variations.http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2007/01/25/000090341_20070125140210/Rendered/PDF/E15390Naandi0L1ssment0Report1270906.pdf

==Religion==

Like every other village in Andhra Pradesh, this village also has a mixture of people with different religions. Majority of the people are Hindus, 30% of the population are Muslims and Christians will be in Minority. This village is very famous for Hindu festivals along withother religious gatherings. It has 3 famous temples including Ramalayam,Sivalayam, Sai baba temple, Venugopal Swamy temple. Brahamam gari matam on the way to railway station is very famous and very old one. 
Pedavadlapudi has one big masjid located in the middle of the village and 100mts far from the bus stop. It attracts people from other villages for the Friday prayers and also for Eid Namaz. Idgah (place for Eid prayers) is located 2 km away from the village in the green fields.

==Education==

Pedavadlapudi has seven schools.
1. MPPUP School – మండల ప్రజా పరిషత్ Upper Primary School located 300 meters away from bus stand of the village. It teaches only up to 7th standard
2. ZPPH School – జిల్లా ప్రజా పరిషత్ ఉన్నత పాటశాల which is located 1 km away from the bus stand of the village. This school was newly started after Sri. Pathuri Nagabhushanam become ZP chairman. It teaches up to 10th standard.
3. Unknown School – This is located near panchayat. But it teaches only up to 5th standard.
4. Urdu School – This is located 100 meters far from Bus stand and located in Muslim area. It teaches in Urdu medium and it run by the help of Masjid committee.
5. Nagarjuna Public School – This is the first private school with total of 2600 students. After this school has come, many things were changed in the prospective of education in Pedavadlapudi
6. ATPM High school – This is located 2 km far from bus stand there are two schools in it one is primary teaches up to 5th standard another teaches from 6th to 10th standard. It was under the management of Roman Catholic Mission (RCM).  
7. Vjeta High School-located on Mangalagir road near Sai Baba temple. Now it is topping in 10th public results year after year.
The Hyderabad-based NIE Co-ordinator Jyothi Raja came especially for this inaugural session at which she explained to the students how by reading newspaper daily they can get a lot of information and knowledge. She said that knowledge, skill and ability were the most essentials things for any student.
Ms. Jyothi told them that these NIE sessions will concentrate on helping them identify their individual skills and tell them ways and means to enhance their abilities and sharpen existing skills.
She told the students an innovative way of using the 5 W’s and 1 H to write their examination answers. She took up an example of the Battle of Plassey and explained to the student how they could reproduce the answer easily by using this technique. She advised them to start their answer with a "what" then continue with "where", "when", "who" and finally end with a "why". She told students the "how" can be used in cases of science examinations and experiments. She assured them that if they were to use this method they can easily ace their examinations.
Co-ordinator from Vijayawada Shailaja advised the students to follow the tips given by NIE resource persons in these special sessions.
After the formal inauguration, introductory session was held by the NIE resource persons Sai Leela. She started off with explaining to the students about the benefits of reading a newspaper. The interactive session had active participation from the students with one of them Mohana Padmaja being quick in grasping the point and even repeating it.
The session was also a very practical one where she made the students read a newspaper and showed them how to use the information they get. Representatives of The Hindu and the school management were present on the occasion and stressed on the importance of every student reading a newspaper.

==Politics==

Like every other village, Pedavadlapudi is also part of main state and local politics. Pedavadlapudi is mainly divided into three parties: Congress (I), Telugu Desam Party (TDP), and Communist Party of India – Marxist (CPM). Recently, the emergence of the YSR Congress Party (YCRCP) from YS Jagan Mohan Reddy has attracted many youngsters. However, local panchyat sarpanch is under TDP, whereas MLA and MP are under Congress (I)
The current panchayat sarpanch is recently elected.
Pedavadlapudi comes under Mangalagiri assembly constituency and Tenali parliamentary constituency. Currently MLA of Mangalagiri is Srimathi Kandru Kamala (Congress) and MP of Tenali is Balashowry Vallabhaneni

===Members of Legislative Assembly of Mangalagiri===

Mangalagiri is an assembly constituency situated between Vijayawada, and Guntur cities. The boundaries for this constituent are Velagapudi in Tullur Mandal in north-west direction, Krishna river in north, Ramachandrapuram in east, Kaja in south, Kanteru in south-west, and Neerukonda in West. It consists of 32 villages, 1 municipal town in the jurisdiction of 4 Revenue Mandals. The serial number of this assembly constituency is 102.

==Climate==

 
 

==Geography==

Pedavadlapudi is located at 16°24'35.21" N 80°.36'40.92" E, and lies in Southern India. It borders the Revendrapadu to the east, Ippatam on the north, Mangalagiri on west and Chiluvuru on south.

==Water Facility==

The major problem in Pedavadlapudi village is drinking water. Once upon time (till 2001), Pedavadlapudi's drinking water was very famous and more popular among other villages. Ground water become high in salt content especially after the establishment of Coca-Cola company in the outskirts of village. During the TDP regime, there was a proposal for drinking water tank to be build in the village and supply will be from Krishna River. However, the project was withheld due to political reasons.
After that, few private RO Water suppliers established in the Village. Among them, RO Water facility in Nagarjuna school is very famous. Even Panchyat has started the RO Water supply with the help of Nandi foundation but it failed in attracting the villagers. It is equipped with UV technology for purifying water and has a processing capacity of 1000 litres per hour (lph). The plant was commissioned in Jan 2007 and uses pond as a source of water for processing. Because of these reasons, the quality of RO water from this system is not popular among villagers.

==Water Wars==

It’s farmers vs Coca Cola again, this time in Guntur district of Andhra Pradesh. Even as several villages in the area grapple with acute drinking water shortage and farmers seek better irrigation facilities, the government has allotted 2,150 cubic metre or 2150,000 litres of water from the river Krishna per day to M/s Hindustan Coca Cola Beverages Pvt Ltd at its plant in Atmakuru village. The government order (GO Ms. No. 26), issued on 26 March 2010, has triggered protests by farmer bodies. The CPI, CPI(M) and the Telugu Desam Party say the state government is compromising the farmers' right to water by giving it to a beverage company.
Coca Cola, which has been operating in Atmakuru for over a decade now, earlier relied on groundwater for its operations. It sought permission to use water from the Krishna Water Main Canal in December 2007. Permission now granted, it has left locals fuming. According to the GO, Coca Cola can use the 2,150 cu m a day for 10 years. The annual outflow of water will be 0.02 tmc (thousand million cubic feet). The firm will lay its own pipeline and water meter, and will be charged industrial rates (Rs 4,500 per million gallon). The Krishna Water Main canal is part of the Buckingham canal, which is specifically meant to meet irrigation and drinking water requirements in Prakasam and Guntur districts.
According to agricultural experts, 1 tmc of water can irrigate about 10,000 acres per annum. Therefore 0.02 tmc can irrigate 200 acres per annum. This is the first time a beverage company is being allowed to draw water from a canal specifically meant for irrigation and drinking. However, both principal secretary, irrigation, S.K. Joshi, and the Hindustan Coca Cola spokesperson term the quantity of water as negligible. Joshi says the allotment of water will not affect the upper and lower riparian rights along the canal. "Besides,” he adds, "the firm will not be allowed to draw water for three months during the closure of the canal."
Farmers, however, are unwilling to buy the "negligible" explanation. "If, as they say, the quantity is so less, why is Coca Cola so eager to lay a pipeline at its own cost,” asks cpi’s Guntur district secretary, Muppala Nageswara Rao, who staged a protest outside the Coca Cola plant earlier this month along with farmers. "About 15 villages around the Coca Cola factory have been seeking potable water from the government under the protected drinking water scheme but to no avail. Places like Atmakuru, Revendrapadu, Pedavadlapudi, Chinnavadlapudi, Ippatam, Tadepalli, Duggirala and Tenali (rural) are struggling with water shortage. Giving all these people the short shrift, the government has issued this GO. Does the government want its rural poor to drink beverages sold by Coke?”
TDP MLAs from Guntur P. Pulla Rao and D. Narendra Kumar wonder why the government is being so generous to Coca Cola which "does business in selling water and beverages whose quality itself has been suspect for long". Kumar says the GO has set a dangerous precedent that threatens the water security of farmers and others. "If Coca Cola wanted only a 'small quantity' of water, why couldn’t it ask the Mangalagiri municipality (which would have refused a higher volume)? Moreover, the company might even draw more than the allotted 0.02 tmc. If it draws 1 or 2 tmc, is there any authority to oversee this?” asks Kumar.
Pulla Rao says it’s astonishing that the government could favour a company that has faced legal suits in Kerala. "As an industry, it won’t even serve the people like, say, a power unit would. We demand that the GO be withdrawn immediately,” he says. TDP chief Chandrababu Naidu also spoke out against the move at a farmers' protest rally on Prakasam barrage. "Is there surplus water in the Krishna delta?” he asked. "The state is supplying canal water to a commercial enterprise which sells it right back to the people in the form of mineral water and soft drinks at higher prices."
The company’s use of groundwater till now, farmers in the area suspect, has led to a fall in water tables and affected soil fertility. J. Hanumantha Rao, a small farmer in Pedavadlapudi, says his crop of corn has been affected badly over the last three years. "My yield has fallen by 30 per cent. The plants, which are supposed to stand for 120 days or so, now attain fruition in 80 days' time. The size and quality of the corn has been affected as a result,” he says. Bhavana Srinivasa Rao, secretary, Guntur District Rythu Sangam, says that soil salinity has increased in the last five years. "We strongly feel that the company is dumping untreated waste water into the ground and is overshooting its permissible limit of groundwater drawal,” says Rao. Other farmers in Pedavadlapudi and Atmakuru—A. Radhakrishna, J. Sambasiva Rao, Bhavana Venkateswara Rao—complain of similar things. "A white sheen is seen on our crop of lady’s finger and even the soil. This is a sure pointer to pollution of groundwater,” says Venkateswara Rao.
Many people in this village say the drinking water is really bad. "We all buy water for cooking and drinking from a drinking water project run by Naandi Foundation,” says Srinivasa Rao. What the villagers don’t know, however, is that Coca Cola runs this community water initiative along with Naandi in two villages of Guntur district.
There have been murmurs even within the Congress against the canal water being supplied to Coca Cola. Deputy speaker Nadendla Manohar has said it was incorrect to allow Coca Cola to draw Krishna water from the canal and has spoken out against industry minister Kanna Lakshminarayana’s decision.
Meanwhile, Deepak Jolly, vice-president (public affairs and communications), Coca Cola, protests against the "misinformation" campaign by some political parties. "It has been Coca Cola’s policy to combine usage of ground and surface water. Coca Cola is a respected company which operates as per the laws of the land. We do a lot of CSR in AP. Coca Cola is one of the largest buyers of mangoes from farmers for Maaza,” says Jolly. What would he rather have? If they can’t have water, let them have Coke, aye?http://www.outlookindia.com/article.aspx?265170

==Banks in Pedavadlapudi==

1. BANK OF INDIA,
Ground Floor,
Pedavadlapudi
IFSC CODE : bkid0008631. 
MICR CODE : 522013582. 
2. CHAITANYA GODAVARI GRAMEENA BANK (ANDHRA BANK),
Ground Floor, D. No. 4-114, 
Near Venugopala Swamy Temple,
Pedavadlapudi
IFSC Code : ANDB0007999
MICR Code : 520011251

==Photos from Pedavadlapudi==

File:Pedavadlapudi.jpg|Fly over of Pedavadlapudi
File:Pedavadlapudi1.jpg|Sunset
File:Pedavadlapudi2.jpg|'''Fly over of Pedavadlapudi
File:Pedavadlapudi3.jpg|'''Worker
File:Pedavadlapudi4.jpg|'''Worker

==References==


