[[North Sea Offshore Grid]]

CATEGORIES: North Sea energy, Proposed energy projects, Renewable energy in Europe, Proposed energy infrastructure in Europe, Electric power transmission systems in Europe, Electric power transmission systems in Germany, Electric power infrastructure in Sweden, Electric power infrastructure in Denmark, Electric power infrastructure in France, Electric power infrastructure in the Netherlands, Renewable energy in Germany, Renewable energy in the Netherlands, Renewable energy in the United Kingdom, Renewable energy in the Republic of Ireland, Renewable energy in France, Renewable energy in Denmark, Renewable energy in Sweden, Submarine power cables

The North Sea Offshore Grid, officially the North Seas Countries Offshore Grid Initiative (NSCOGI), is a collaboration between EU member-states and Norway to create an integrated offshore energy grid which links wind farms and other renewable energy sources across the northern seas of Europe. It is one of several proposed European super grid schemes.

==History==

The North Sea Offshore Grid was proposed by the European Commission in the Second Strategic Energy Review, published in November 2008. The initiative was identified as one of the six priority energy infrastructure actions of the European Union. According to the European Commission, the North Sea Offshore Grid should become one of the building blocks of a future European super grid.
The political declaration of the North Seas Countries Offshore Grid Initiative was signed on 7 December 2009 at the European Union Energy Council.  The declaration was signed by Germany, United Kingdom, France, Denmark, Sweden, the Netherlands, Belgium, Ireland and Luxembourg.
In 2010, the European Commission plans to publish a "Blueprint for a North Sea Grid".Jan De Decker, Achim Woyte. 4 offshore grid scenarios for the North and Baltic Sea Offshoregrid.eu, July 2010. Retrieved: 24 August 2010.

==Description==

Electricity would be transmitted via high-voltage direct current cables, allowing it to be sold and exchanged in all involved countries. It would also make it easier to optimise energy production, and make the system overall less susceptible to the climate; Norway's hydroelectric power plants could act as a "giant battery", storing the power produced and releasing it at peak times, or when wind strength is low.  Several high-voltage direct current interconnectors such as proposed cable between Norway and the United Kingdom have been seen as integral parts of the project.

==Significance==

Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural Resources for the Government of Ireland, Eamon Ryan, said of the initiative:

==Studies==

A techno-economic study into the North Sea Offshore Grid, has been set up within the European Union's Intelligent Energy Europe programme, to consider the technical, economic, policy and regulatory aspects of the possible grid, focused on the North Sea and Baltic region.OffshoreGrid, published 2011, accessed 2011-10-03

==Support==

Friends of the Supergrid, a group of companies and organisations interested in promoting the concept and influencing the development of a super grid within Europe, has taken an interest in the North Sea Grid proposals.Friends of the Supergrid, European Energy Forum, accessed 2011-10-03Friends of the Supergrid - Official site accessed 2011-10-03 The organisation has proposed that Phase I of the supergrid should integrate the UK's North Sea renewables with interconnections to Germany and Norway.A European Supergrid Energy and Climate Change Select Committee, published September 2011, accessed 2011-10-03

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


