[[Sacred Heart Chapel (Barrytown, New York)]]

CATEGORIES: Religious organizations established in 1886, Religious organizations disestablished in 1975, Roman Catholic churches in New York, Churches in Dutchess County, New York, Closed churches in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York

The Chapel of the Sacred Heart is a former Roman Catholic parish church under the authority of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, located in Barrytown, Dutchess County, New York City. It was established in 1886 as a parish; formerly a mission of St. Joseph in Rhinecliff.Remigius Lafort, S.T.D., Censor, The Catholic Church in the United States of America: Undertaken to Celebrate the Golden Jubilee of His Holiness, Pope Pius X. Volume 3: The Province of Baltimore and the Province of New York, Section 1: Comprising the Archdiocese of New York and the Diocese of Brooklyn, Buffalo and Ogdensburg Together with some Supplementary Articles on Religious Communities of Women.. (New York City: The Catholic Editing Company, 1914), p.398.  It was suppressed as a parish ca. 1975.

==History==

The Sacred Heart Church and Cemetery were established in the late 1800s to accommodate the Irish Catholic population 
who were employed on the railroads and large estates in Barrytown and the surrounding hamlets. Prior to a Catholic church
in Barrytown, the residents of the area attended services across the river in Kingston and Saugerties. People would walk
across the frozen river in winter or cross by boat in other seasons, weather permitting. Walter V. Miller in "A Parish History"
tells of an old tale: "The account has it that, on one occasion, a boat and its occupants thereof narrowly missed playing the
leading role in a very tragic incident, this happening, strange as it may seem, played a very large part in establishing of the 
first church at Barrytown instead of Red Hook." Apparently, some members of the Donaldson family of Edgewater were 
on that boat. The Donaldson family donated the land for the church and cemetery at Barrytown. The laying of the church 
corner stone was 1875. The first burial in the Cemetery was November 23, 1886Egbert Benson Historical Society
The cornerstone of the church was laid by Rev. Thomas S. Preston on October 17, 1875. Barrytown was a mission attended from St. Joseph's in Rhinecliff until 1886 when Archbishop Corrigan appointed Rev. William J. McClure resident rector.

==Pastors==

==References==


