[[St. Charles Borromeo's Church (Dover Plains, New York)]]

CATEGORIES: Religious organizations established in 1866, Roman Catholic churches in New York, Churches in Dutchess County, New York, 1866 establishments in New York

The Church of St. Charles Borromeo is a Roman Catholic parish church under the authority of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, located in Dover Plains, Dutchess County, New York. It was founded in 1866 as a mission of Immaculate Conception Parish of Amenia. In 1885 it became a mission of St. John the Evangelist's Church in Pawling, and was finally itself elevated to parish status in 1936.

==History==

Dover Plains was a branch mission served first by Father Michael Riordan, pastor of St. Peter's, Poughkeepsie; then later by Denis Sheehan, pastor of St. Mary's, Wappingers Falls.
In 1859 Archbishop Hughes appointed Rev. Charles Slevin, as the first resident priest. Father Slavin became responsible for the whole Harlem Valley. He resided at Dover Plains and built the church there. Dover Plains was chosen as the headquarters for the missions of Amenia, Beekman, Millbrook, Millerton, and Pawling, where there were no churches.  It was Father Slevin who built St. Charles' church. He was drafted during the Civil War, but his congregation made up the $300 fee to gain his exemption. Father Slevin left in 1864. His successor, Rev. John Arsenigo lived in Purdy's Station.Remigius Lafort, S.T.D., Censor, The Catholic Church in the United States of America: Undertaken to Celebrate the Golden Jubilee of His Holiness, Pope Pius X. Volume 3: The Province of Baltimore and the Province of New York, Section 1: Comprising the Archdiocese of New York and the Diocese of Brooklyn, Buffalo and Ogdensburg Together with some Supplementary Articles on Religious Communities of Women.. (New York City: The Catholic Editing Company, 1914), p.422
In 1886 Father Tandy became resident Pastor at Immaculate Conception in Amenia, with Pawling and Dover as missions.  With the appointment in 1872 of Father Healy to St. John the Evangelist responsibility for St. Charles' mission was transferred to Pawling.Doulin, Rev. George T., History of the Parish of St. John the Evangelist and the Mission Church of St. Charles Borromeo

==Our Lady of Solace==

Our Lady of Solace Chapel in Wingdale,was part of St. Charles Borromeo parish in Dover Plains until 2013.  It was built in 1962.Palumbo, Matt, ''A Resurrection of the Harlem Valley Psychiatric Center (September 15, 2004)

==The Center for Compassion==

Loaves & Fishes ministry is a program started by the Sisters of the Divine Compassion, providing companionship, food, and language tutoring to the residents of Dover Plains and Wingdale. The elderly and homebound of the Dover Plains area are the ministry’s target population. Loaves & Fishes operates the food pantry. This pantry, stocked by the parishioners of St. Charles and area residents, provides free food to low-income families of Dover Plains & Wingdale.
It also offers a Welcome Table at lunchtime every week at the VFW hall in Amenia.  From November through April free homemade soup and sandwiches or hot entrees are available every Thursday from 12 noon until 2 PM. The meal and fellowship are open to all. Welcome Table volunteers also deliver over 50 meals to shut-ins every week, providing good food and good company to the poor, elderly and infirm of the community. Visiting, transport to doctor’s offices and hospitals are provided by volunteers. The Loaves and Fishes works with local agencies, civic groups and the local parish to identify those in need.Loaves and Fishes

==References==


