[[Lancaster Volunteer Ambulance Corps]]

CATEGORIES: Ambulance services in the United States, Lancaster, New York

The Lancaster Volunteer Ambulance Corps, also known as the LVAC & simply as Lancaster Ambulance is a not-for-profit (501c3) EMS agency in Lancaster, New York. The Corps primary response area is the Village & Town of Lancaster  and the Village of Depew. It also responds to areas via mutual aid agreements and requests for service. LVAC responds 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. The LVAC is a combination EMS agency, having a career staff on duty 24/7 and supplemented by a volunteer staff. Lancaster Ambulance covers a population of about 68,000 people in a geographic area of approximately 45 square miles and responds to over 4,000 EMS requests a year. 
The Lancaster Volunteer Ambulance Corps is dispatched by the Lancaster Police Department and receives online medical direction through the Erie County Medical Center.

==History==

The Lancaster Volunteer Ambulance Corps was formed initially as the Lancaster Town Police Ambulance Service. Residents at the time were concerned due to delayed response times of ambulances coming from the nearby city of Buffalo, New York. Initially, the Dresser Railcar Factory in Depew donated a used 1947 Mercury ambulance to be used for the new ambulance service. On duty police officers were summoned when a rescue call came in, and they would drive to the police station to pick up the ambulance and go to the call. However, the Auxiliary police officers were invaluable to this operation as well. They would be called at home or spend time at the garage where the ambulance was quartered. Generally during daytime hours the active police would respond and at night the auxiliary police would respond to requests for the ambulance. The last surviving founding member, former Auxiliary police officer and Director At Large Paul Welker is still active in the Corps. In those initial years, the ambulance fleet included over the years a 1955 Cadillac ambulance, a 1955 Ford Emergency Truck and a 1962 Pontiac ambulance to just name a few.
In the early 1970s the Lancaster Town Police Department, no longer wishing to be in the ambulance service, allowed its members to form the Lancaster Volunteer Ambulance Corps. In 1975, the Lancaster Volunteer Ambulance Corps was incorporated as a separate entity. However, the police department & ambulance corps have an excellent working relationship till this day. The original ambulance corps was housed behind Lancaster Town Hall on Clark Street in a cramped two bay garage until 1996.
Lancaster Ambulance responds with the Lancaster Police Department as well as the Depew Police Department to all EMS calls within the Village boundaries. Both the Lancaster & Depew Fire Departments only respond if requested by EMS (such as a lift assist or a motor vehicle accident). Day to day EMS calls are not handled by either village's fire departments. Within the Town of Lancaster, Lancaster Ambulance responds with the Bowmansville Volunteer Fire Association, Town Line Fire Department, Twin District Fire Company & the Millgrove Volunteer Fire Department.
The fall of 2010 was the most turbulent time for the ambulance corps in recent memory. After many years of uninterrupted service to the citizens of the Town of Lancaster, Rural Metro Medical Services, which had covered mutual aid calls for Lancaster, began an aggressive shift towards the Town of Lancaster to take over ambulance services. Much of it centered on the belief by Rural Metro and their former GM (whom is a Lancaster resident) that Lancaster could not cover or handle their own calls. In FY'10 LVAC did drop roughly 362 EMS calls to mutual aid. However, in FY'11 that number dropped to less than 10 EMS calls dropped. That number stayed concurrent in FY'12. This was done in part with programs such as having PSS (Paid Support Staff) on call during off duty hours, so whereas a volunteer response was minimal (such as during daytime hours), they are paged to come in. Technological improvements such as the I Am Responding system which sends text & email notifications immediately to members also assisted.
Heated exchanges took place during Town Hall meetings between Rural Metro management, Lancaster Ambulance members and public officials. Public outcry over the rumored shift towards Rural Metro and not supporting the community service was invaluable in maintaining ambulance coverage by Lancaster Ambulance. Since 1996, Lancaster Ambulance was given $45,000 a year by the town government as well as volunteer workers compensation was paid for by them as well. Since 2011, the Corps no longer receives any financial support from the Town of Lancaster and the Corps itself pays for the volunteer workers compensation which is mandated in New York State Law to be paid for by the municipality. Lancaster Ambulance is the only first response agency in the Lancaster/Depew area who does not receive any taxpayer funding. LVAC only sources of revenue intake is an annual Fund Drive mailing and through third party billing for use of the ambulance & services.
In April 2011, Lancaster Ambulance formally changed their mutual aid partner to Twin City Ambulance, however the Town of Lancaster Board at that time refused to recognize that pact,(the thought was Twin City was coming from a further distance) whereas still Rural Metro is requested for EMS calls on the rare occasion no ambulances are available from Lancaster. However the Village of Depew does have Twin City Ambulance respond if no ambulance is available.

==Career Division==

In 2000, a Career Division was formed to cover times when volunteers were unavailable for calls, primarily during the daytime hours. Initially only 1 PSS (Paid Support Staff) crew was on duty for 12 hours. Today there are 3 PSS crews on duty between the hours of 0600-1800 and 2 PSS crews available between the hours of 1800-0600. This facilitates 24/7/365 Paramedic coverage for the ambulance district. In FY'12, a 4th PSS "peak" ambulance was placed in service during the summer months to supplement the normal on-duty crews as call volume spikes during the months of May through September. This 4th PSS crew operates from 1100-2100 hrs Monday-Friday. It has since become a fully manned 4th Career ambulance on duty from 1600-0000 to cover crew changes and spikes in call volume. Roughly 98% of all EMS calls handled by the ambulance corps are handled by career staff due to dwindling volunteer members. Career Staff are also summoned to respond off duty if the need for additional manpower/high call volume arises.
All uniformed members of the Career Staff are at least EMT Level, highly trained & experienced personnel. Many if not most PSS have high call volume experience from working at the various commercial & municipal ambulance services in Western New York. Also many are either current or former members of the fire service. Current Full Time Staff includes 7 Paramedics, 6 Advanced EMT's, & 3 EMT's. Full-time Career Staff are supplemented with part-time/per diem staff as well.
Career Division are managed by the Executive Branch of the Ambulance Corps.

==Volunteer Division==

The Volunteer Division was formed in 1975 with the incorporation of the Lancaster Volunteer Ambulance Corps. During the late 70's and 1980's volunteer ranks swelled to almost 100-120 members on the membership roster. Today, new volunteer members are brought in dependent on application intake. Initially, probationary members are on a probationary period for 1 year. These new members do not need to be trained EMS personnel, as there are various non-EMS ranks for volunteer members. The Corps has a select group of membership that are strictly Dispatchers or Drivers. Volunteer members are required to perform no less than 16 hours of "squad" time each month. Members are not required to live within the confines of the ambulance district. Recruitment of new volunteer members has been a difficult issue in recent years, which is commonplace with many volunteer fire/EMS agencies in today's economic conditions.
Volunteer operations are managed by a Director of Operations (900) and 2 Assistant DO's.  Other positions within the Corps include a Director of Maintenance (910) and Director of Training. The Executive branch which is in charge of the day-to-day operations of the Corps includes the President, Vice President,Director of Membership,Director of Maintenance and an At-Large Director as well as Treasurer and Secretary. All these positions are held by volunteer staff and career staff are not eligible for these positions.

==Fleet==

The Corps currently operates six (6) ambulances: two (2) 2005 Braun type-3 ambulances,one (1) 2006 Braun type-3 ambulance, one (1)1997 Traumahawk type-3 ambulance, one (1)2009 Road Rescue type-3.  and one (1)2012 McCoy Miller Guardian II Type II van ambulance. An older ambulance,824, a 1999 type-3 ambulance, was recently taken out of service as a front-line ambulance and has been since sold.  
Also available as a response vehicle is a 2010 Chevrolet Tahoe ALS flycar (700). 700 is also utilized as a Special Services vehicle for transport of the Emergency Bicycle Unit & SWAT Medics. A Special Operations trailer is available for transport of equipment, EBU Bicycles, and other items for Special Events.
The Director of Operations has their own response vehicle, (900). This vehicle was the prior 700 flycar vehicle. Previously, the Corps did operate a BLS flycar (701) and an assistant DO vehicle (901), but were sold to streamline finances and lower worker's comp costs.
Also available in the fleet are (4) Smith & Wesson Tactical Mountain Bikes. The designated ambulance numbers for the LVAC are 800,801,802,803,824,825 & 826.

==Ambulance Station==

In 1996, the Lancaster Volunteer Ambulance Corps relocated to a new, more modern and much larger ambulance station located at 40 Embry Place. This site was chosen due to it being centrally located within the vast ambulance district. The station is equipped with 5 apparatus bays which houses the 6 ambulances and 1 flycar. A living room (squad room),kitchen,dispatch center,training room,as well as offices and sleeping quarters for crews. As the station houses crews 24/7/365, the station is always manned by personnel at any given time.  With an increased call volume & increasing population, the Corps is looking at in the future of expansion of bays & office/ training and community space to the current headquarters.

==Standard Equipment==

Standard equipment on each ambulance includes some of the following: an Zoll cardiac monitor; epinephrine auto-injectors (Epi-Pen); oxygen administered via nasal cannulas; non rebreathing masks and bag valve masks; various length splints; stairchair; oral glucose; sterile gauze bandages and medical tape; blood pressure cuffs; oral suction device. Various immobilization equipment such as backboards, topdecks, KED's are on board each ambulance as well. 
Each ambulance carries speedy dry, shovels for MVA's where fluid spills occur. Each ambulance is also equipped with Halligan tools, EMS helmets, etc. As well ALS providers carry various medications such as Zofran, Albuterol, Nitroglycerin,Asprin,Morphine,Epinephrine,etc. 
Also the Lancaster Volunteer Ambulance Corps is one of the 1st agencies in the region to have coolers on each ambulance for new hypothermia protocols with regards to cardiac arrest. 
In addition, 700 has a RAD-57 CO detector, which is invaluable at a medical scene to rule out possible Carbon Monoxide poisoning. The RAD-57 is used to measure CO levels in a patients bloodstream.  Again, this tool is unheard of in local EMS agencies.

==Specialized Units==

The Corps has a contingent of Tactical Medics. LVAC's Tactical Medics, both career staff & volunteer members, are summoned when the Lancaster Police Department's ERT is activated. Some members are current law enforcement as well as military with backgrounds in advanced tactical medicine. They go on multiple standbys each year and go with the LPD Emergency Response Team on various scenarios in multiple jurisdictions. The Lancaster Police Department actually utilizes for its SWAT vehicle a former ambulance from the Corps.
There had been preliminary talk of reforming the Corp's Water/Ice Rescue Team. This would be the only independent EMS Agency in the area to have certified Rescue EMTs/Medics in this form of rescue if it is reformed.
The Corps is also one of the only EMS agencies in Western New York as well to provide dedicated rehab services on fire standbys. Blood pressure/pulse/CO2/SpO2 monitoring services are at the ready at confirmed structure fires as well as rehydration for firefighters. One ambulance is dedicated to fireground operations while another is specifically dedicated to the FAST/RIT team.
The Corps latest addition to specialized units is an Emergency Bicycle Unit. 4 police spec'd mountain bikes fully equipped with EMS equipment will be utilized in the community for special events such as the Fourth of July weekend, Taste of Lancaster, Como Lake Park, Dunn Tire Speedway, and the various bicycle trails as well as the retail districts of Lancaster/Depew. These include patrols with the Lancaster Police Department's bike team along the Heritage Trail.
LVAC in the past had provided dedicated standby services at Dunn Tire Raceway. That facility is now covered by Rural/Metro Medical Services
During the summer months the Corps does offer to the community free of charge dedicated standby crews for various functions within the ambulance district, such as the Taste of Lancaster.

==Current Line Officer/Executive Officers==

Operations: As of 10/20/2013
Director of Operations           (900): Lawrence Pohl EMT-P
Assistant Director of Operations (901): Mark Reed EMT
Assistant Director of Operations (902): Daniel McCarthy EMT-P
Director of Training: Gregory P. Jankiewicz EMT-P
Executive Branch: As of 10/20/2013
President: Chester Popiolkowski EMT
Vice President/Corporate Compliance Officer: Jeffrey A. Bono EMT
Paid Staff Coordinator: Jeffrey A. Bono EMT
Treasurer: Nancy Franjoine Driver
Secretary: Charlotte Basher EMT
Director of Membership: Allison Revelas AEMT
Director at Large: Mark Reinhard EMT
Director of Maintenance: Timothy Marshall Driver
Corps Historian: Paul Welker Driver

==External links==

==References==


