[[Immaculate Conception Church (Amenia, New York)]]

CATEGORIES: Religious organizations established in 1866, Roman Catholic churches in New York, Churches in Dutchess County, New York, 1866 establishments in New York

The Church of Immaculate Conception is a Roman Catholic parish church under the authority of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, located in Amenia, Dutchess County, New York City. It was established as a parish  in 1866.Remigius Lafort, S.T.D., Censor, The Catholic Church in the United States of America: Undertaken to Celebrate the Golden Jubilee of His Holiness, Pope Pius X. Volume 3: The Province of Baltimore and the Province of New York, Section 1: Comprising the Archdiocese of New York and the Diocese of Brooklyn, Buffalo and Ogdensburg Together with some Supplementary Articles on Religious Communities of Women.. (New York City: The Catholic Editing Company, 1914), p.398.

==History==

According to tradition, a Father Kelly of Connecticut, was the first priest to minister to Amenia. Settlers ariived about 1847, a number to work in the iron ore beds of Sharon Station.
The Immaculate Conception parish in Amenia, originally included the parishes currently in Dover Plains, Pawling, Pine Plains and Millbrook. Parish records indicate that in 1844 the first priest known to attend the sick and say an occasional Mass in the area of Northeast and Amenia was Fr. Riordan of St. Peter's Church, Poughkeepsie. In Amenia, he first celebrated Mass in the home of Thomas McEnroe. Then, in 1859 Father Charles Slavin became responsible for early Catholics here by being given charge of the whole Harlem Valley. He resided at Dover Plains and built the church there. Fr. John Arsenigo followed him, in 1864, living at Croton Falls. He used to say Mass in the sheds at the railroad station in Amenia and in homes around Millerton. It was he who purchased the land and started to build the churches in Amenia and Millerton. During the pastorate of Fr. Orsenigo, masses were held in private homes around the village while preparations were made to build a church.
Fr. Tandy became the first resident pastor in 1864 and established the first Immaculate Conception Church in 1868 presiding over the additional missions in Pawling, Dover Plains, Millerton and Millbrook for twelve years. According to his diary, Fr. Tandy was forced to resign in 1880 "under the strain of so many outlying missions"; a complaint which was echoed by many of the succeeding pastors.LaMorte, Rev. Richard, ''Immaculate Conception-St. Patrick Parish. 1868 to Present 1988
Fr. Tandy was succeeded by Rev. Daniel J. Corckery in June 1880. In September 1881 a parish achool was established. On July 29, 1886 the church was destroyed by lightning. The cornerstone of the new church was laid June 12, 1887.Lavelle, Rev. Francis E. in Hasbrouck, Frank, ed. The History of Dutchess County New York, p642, S.A. Mathieu, Poughkeepsie, NY 1909

==Pastors==

==References==


