[[Taipei Municipal Zhong-zheng Senior High School]]

CATEGORIES: High schools in Taiwan, Schools in Taipei, Educational institutions established in 1945, 1945 establishments in China

Zhong-zheng Senior High School
(ZZSH or CCSH, Traditional Chinese Characters: 臺北市立中正高中, Hanyu Pinyin: táiběi shìlì zhōngzhèng gāozhōng, Tongyong Pinyin: taibei shihli jhong jheng gaojhong, Wade–Giles: t'aipei shihli chung cheng kaochung) is a public 3-year high school in Taipei City, Taiwan, Republic of China.

==History==

Taipei Municipal Zhong-zheng Senior High School, formerly the Taipei County Shih-lin Junior High School, was established in 1945 and began to enroll new students the next year. The first principal was Mr. Su Jin-zhuan, and after the conduct of the following principals, Mr. Ho Jiang-shan, Mr. Hsieh Da-huang and Ms. Shao Meng-lan, this school expanded and developed rapidly and enjoyed growing reputation. 
In 1964, the senior high school was added on a trial basis and with good results, this school was converted into a complete high school in 1966, under the jurisdiction of the Yangmingshan Management Bureau. In 1968, the Yangmingshan Management Bureau was formally taken over by the Taipei City Government. In July, this school was separated into two schools—Taipei Municipal Shih-lin Senior High School and Junior High School. By order of the government, the campus was assigned as the junior high school in 1972 and the senior high school was moved to the present site, Shi-pai, on February 25, 1975. 
In August 1975, this school was renamed as Taipei Municipal Zhong-zheng Senior High School. In the same year, Ms. Shao Meng-lan announced her retirement. After Ms. Shao were Mr. Yu Wei-lu, Ms. Ding Ya-wen and Mr. Lin Shi-de. The current principal, Mr. Liu Zheng-ming, assumed office in August 2003. Since then, Principal Liu has showed great respect for the school faculty, students and their parents. Moreover, he has spared no effort to handle school affairs with enthusiasm to steer the school into a bright future. 
Covering a spacious beautiful campus of about 23,000 pings, this school was completed with all the necessary facilities in 1975. With the completion of Yi-teh Building in 1987, artistic education was included to help students of talent for arts, music and dancing. 
Our teaching staff is qualified and excellent and so are the students. Together with the school staff, students in this school have achieved very good results, both in academic performance and in extra-curricular activities. We believe we will make our best endeavors to ensure our school greater success.

==Location==

Taipei Municipal Zhong-zheng Senior High School is located in the northwest of the Taipei Basin.

==External links==


