[[Urban Partnership Bank]]

CATEGORIES: Banks based in Illinois, Banks established in 2010, Companies based in Chicago, Illinois, Community development

Urban Partnership Bank is a U.S. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation-insured, full-service community development bank in the United States with $1.4 billion in assets. It was established August 20, 2010, when it acquired the deposits and some of the assets of ShoreBank from the FDIC, and is headquartered in Chicago, Illinois.
The bank’s focus is to build vibrant urban neighborhoods and promote economic and environmental sustainability in distressed and underserved areas of Chicago, Cleveland, and Detroit. Its customers range from individuals to small businesses, nonprofits, foundations, and faith-based organizations. The bank places a special emphasis on serving underbanked populations.

==Origin==

Urban Partnership Bank was established when investors acquired the deposits and assets of ShoreBank from the FDIC. These investors, including socially responsible individuals, financial institutions and foundations, had been impressed by ShoreBank’s mission and values. When ShoreBank started to fail, the new investors stepped in, securing a charter within 30 days and creating a new financial institution.
Urban Partnership Bank acquired all of ShoreBank's $1.54 billion in deposits and most of its $2.16 billion in assets. The FDIC and Urban Partnership Bank share the losses of $1.41 billion of those assets at 20% and 80%, respectively.Chicago's ShoreBank fails, is bought by investors The new bank was capitalized with nearly $140 million.Execs position former ShoreBank for growth.
In July 2011 Urban Partnership Bank was certified as a community development financial institution (CDFI). As such, other institutions can receive Community Reinvestment Act credit for depositing their funds in the bank. It is eligible to apply for programs through the CDFI Fund that support its mission to revitalize its urban neighborhoods.

==Leadership==

Urban Partnership Bank is led by a team of experienced financial services professionals with roots in the community. Urban Partnership Bank President William Farrow and Executive Chairman David Vitale have said that their personal histories led them to take on the task of filling ShoreBank’s shoes.Urban Partnership Bank execs lay out plans for former ShoreBank

==Serving the underbanked==

Urban Partnership Bank positions itself as a lower-cost competitor to currency exchanges and other cash-checking outlets, providing transaction services like prepaid cards to consumers who don’t have bank relationships.Urban Partnership Bank execs lay out plans for former ShoreBank
The bank is closing loan offices and big branch locations and replacing them with “micro-branches” or full-service banking offices that are more welcoming to its customers.Almost a Year After ShoreBank's Failure, Urban Partnership is Ready to Lend

==Branch locations==

In Chicago, the bank’s branches serve the communities of Chatham, Austin, Bellwood, Bronzeville, Greater Grand Crossing, South Shore, Kenwood, Loop, West Ridge, and Stone Park. The bank also maintains branches in Cleveland and Detroit.

==References==


