[[S. J. Nagalotimath]]

CATEGORIES: Indian scientists, 1940 births, 2005 deaths, Indian medical writers, People from Karnataka, People from Gadag, Science and technology in Karnataka

Dr. Sadashivayya Jambayya Nagalotimath (20 July 1940 – 24 October 2006) was an Indian medical scientist and writer.S.J. Nagalotimath dead. The Hindu, 25 October 2006. He also served as the Director of Karnataka Institute of Medical Sciences, Hubli. 
Dr. Nagalotimath was born in Gadag on July 20, 1940. He belonged to a noble family in Banahatti (now in Bagalkot district). He got his medical degree (MBBS Examination of the Karnataka University) with a gold medal for medicine. He started his career in Karnataka Institute of Medical Sciences as a lecturer. Later he did DCP and MD in Pathology. In the year 1970 he came to Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College as Asst Professor on the invitation of Dr. Jeerige. Here he developed the Pathology Museum of world fame. He served here for twenty years and deputed to Bijapura Medical college where he developed a museum of stones of the human body. 
Many papers have been published by him in the national and international journals. He has written extensively in Kannada, ಕನ್ನಡ (local language of Karnataka, India) and English about medical and issues concerning values of life.
He was behind setting up of  many medical colleges in Karnataka.  He was the editor of Indian Journal of Pathology and microbiology and was on the board of many journals related to medical fields, and also served as Dean, Indian College of Pathologists.
He was president of Karnataka Rajyavijnana Parishath, an apex body in Karnataka to spread scientific awareness among the general public. He was conferred the coveted Dr. BC Roy award for his contribution to pathology. Karnataka State government honoured him with Rajyotsava Award. 
Bicchida jolige  ಬಿಚ್ಚಿದ ಜೋಳಿಗೆ is his autobiography.
He died on 24 October 2006 at the KLE Society's Hospital at the age of 66.

==References==

==External links==


