[[Akbar Kakkattil]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Malayalam novelists, 1954 births, People from Kozhikode district, Recipients of the Kerala Sahitya Akademi Award, Malayalam-language writers

Akbar Kakkattil is a prominent short-story writer and novelist from Kerala state, South India. His works are known for their unique narrative style which has an undertone of unfailing humour. Besides, the tales that he wrote centred on teachers and their foibles gave birth to a new genre in Malayalam literature. His 'Paadham 30' is the First Teacher Service Story in Malayalam. His work, 'Sarga Sameeksha', a creative and critical interface of a young writer with the iconic writers of the old generation is perhaps the first of its kind among Indian languages. Equally popular among lowbrow and highbrow readers, Akbar continues his creative voyage regaling everyone with his inimitable works.  

==Life==

Akbar was born on July 7, 1954 at Kakkattil in Kozhikode District as the only son out of the two children of his parents,  Sri. P. Abdulla and Smt. Kunjhamina. He completed his school education from  Parayil L P School, Kakkattil and Sanskrit Secondary School Vattoli. He spend the first half of the first year Pre- Degree at Farook College Calicut and studied up to Degree Course in English Language & Literature at Govt. College Madappalli. The first year of P G course in Malayalam Language & Literature he studied at Kerala Varma College Trichur and again moved to Govt. Brennan College, Tellichery to complete the course. He took his Bachelor of Education degree from Govt. Training College, Tellichery. While studying he was elected Chairman of College Union both at Govt. College Madappally & Training College, Tellichery. He was also executive member of University Union of Calicut University. He has served as a Malayalam teacher  for about 30 years in various schools, including National Higher Secondary School, Vattoli where he worked for a long period. 
Akbar Kakkattil has worked as a member of the governing body of South Zone Cultural Centre of Central Government of India and Kerala State Institute of Children's literature. He has also served as member of curriculum Steering Committee, Kerala Lalitha Kala Akademi, State Television Jury, State Cinema jury,  Ezhuthachan Puraskara Samiti and  Programme Advisory Board of Akashavani, Kozhikkode. Besides he has worked as honorary editor of Malayalam Publications and Olive Publications, Kozhikode. He had been a permanent Jury member of the First Educational Reality Show in Kerala 'Haritha Vidyalaya'.  He was also a member of Malayalam Advisory Board of Kendra Sahitya Akademi and Convener of Publication Committee, Kerala Sahitya Akademi. At present he is the Vice-President of the Kerala Sahitya Academi and Member of Malayalam Advisory Panel of National Book Trust, Govt. of India and Malayalam Advisory Board, Govt of Kerala. He is also a member of State Literacy Mission's Magazine 'Aksharakairali' Editorial Board and Curriculum Committee of National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS), Govt. of India. Akbar Kakkattil is also a part of the committee of revision of Malayalam text books from the primary to the higher secondary level. Right from his college days he has been associated with the Film Society movements.

==Literary life==

Akbar Kakkattil turned to creative writing at the age of fourteen by publishing short stories in a regular column for children in the leading Malayalam weekly Mathrubhoomi. He maintained his connection with the literary giants of Malayalam like G. Sankara Kurup, Thakazhi and Basheer even during his student life by developing pen friendship with them. He has a collection of works to his credit that comprises 49 books. They include four novels, seven collections of novelettes, twenty-five anthologies of short stories, four collections of essays, memoirs, a play and a volume of critical essays and interviews with the leading writers of Malayalam. He has received the Kerala Sahitya Akademi Award twice. The first ever award in humour section in 1992 for his School Diary- an anthology of short essays and in the year 2004, 'Vadakkuninnoru Kudumba Vrithantham' was awarded as the best novel. He has also been honoured twice by the State Government - in the year 1998, his work 'Sthrynam' was awarded with the Joseph Mundassery Award for the best Novel. The Television Award for the best story writer ( School Diary - Doordarsan serial) for the year 2002 also went to him.
The fellowship of Literature from Government of India was bestowed on him in the year 1992. The Abudhabi Sakti Award was received by him in the year 2002. Besides, he has been awarded with S K Pottakkad award, Ankanam Award, Malayala Manorama Prize, Rajiv Gandhi Peace Foundation Award, C H Muhammed Koya Award, T V Kochubaava Award, V Sambasivan Puraskar and Dubai Book Trust Award etc.
With his unique style of writing, Akbar Kakkattil creates a world where readers meet the naive innocence of his village folk, who at times indulge in light vanity, but often unfolds compassion and simplicity. The humanism of his insignificant locale is integrated to the humanism of the world in general. 
His book on Adoor Gopalakrishnan titled Varoo Adoorileykku Pokam is translated to Tamil ("Adoor Gopalakrishnan - Idam Porul Kalai) and his novel Mrithyuyogam is translated to Kannada (Mrithyuyoga).

==Works==

Short-story
Novelette
Novels
Essays
Criticism, Life-sketch,  Interview
Memoirs
Play
Cinima
Children's literature
Service Story
Travalogue

==Awards and honours==

==References==

saahithya akkadami : ‘അക്ബർ കക്കട്ടിൽ പുതിയ വൈസ് പ്രസിഡന്റ്’ Mathrubhumi Daily - Saturday, Dec. 29, 2012


