[[Agustín Abadía]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, Living people, People from the Province of Huesca, Spanish footballers, Aragonese footballers, Association football midfielders, La Liga footballers, Segunda División footballers, Tercera División footballers, CD Logroñés footballers, Atlético Madrid footballers, SD Compostela footballers, Spanish football managers, CD Logroñés managers, Girona FC managers

Agustín Abadía Plana (born 15 April 1962) is a Spanish retired footballer who played as a left midfielder, and a current coach.
Blessed with few technical skills but a tremendous hard-worker,¿Que fue de....? Agustín Abadía (What happened to...? Agustín Abadía); La Coctelera [tpl]es icon[/tpl] his professional career – which included 243 La Liga games and 13 goals over the course of nine seasons – was closely associated with CD Logroñés, as he served the club in several capacities, and in two of its denominations.

==Playing career==

Born in Binéfar, Province of Huesca, Aragon, Tato Abadía made his senior debuts with local CD Binéfar. After two consecutive Tercera División championships he helped the club promote to Segunda División B for the first time in its history, in 1983.
Two years later Abadía signed for CD Logroñés in Segunda División, scoring three goals in 33 games in his second season as the Riojans reached La Liga for the first time ever, and helped the club retain its league status in the following two years, being an important first-team member. In the 1989 off-season he signed for Atlético Madrid, but returned to his previous club after only one season.
From 1990–93, Abadía helped modest Logroñés consecutively retain its top level status, netting a career-best – both in the first division and as a professional – five goals in the 1992–93 season, two of those coming on 14 March 1993 as the team came from behind 0–2 at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium to draw 2–2 against Real Madrid. Aged 31, he signed for SD Compostela and achieved another first-ever promotion in his career in his first year, with the Galicia club reaching the top level after finishing third and promoting in the playoffs against Rayo Vallecano, with the player appearing in all 270 minutes in the tie (two games and a third after the teams drew 1–1 on aggregate).
After only appearing in 14 league matches in 1995–96 (only three starts), 34-year old Abadía returned again to Logroñés, but this time could not help prevent his main club's top flight relegation. He closed out his career with Binéfar in 1999, winning another fourth division championship in his first season.

==Manager career==

Abadía started coaching with his last club, first at youth level, then successfully leading the team into safety in two consecutive division three seasons. He started the 2002–03 season with Logroñés' juveniles, but was promoted to the main squad for the second division promotion playoffs, eventually falling short.
Abadía then managed Girona FC in level three, being sacked after round seven in his second season, which ended in relegation. Once more, he returned to his main club and, in the following seasons, acted as both manager (youth and seniors) and director of football.
In late January 2011, after one year with CD Calahorra in the fourth division four – fourth position, no playoff promotion –El Calahorra destituye a su entrenador, Tito Bengoechea (Calahorra fires coach Tito Bengoechea); La Rioja, 2 December 2008 [tpl]es icon[/tpl] Abadía signed for another team in the category, SD Logroñés (Club Deportivo had already folded after severe economical problems).Agustín Abadía, nuevo entrenador (Agustín Abadía, new manager); SD Logroñés' official website, 26 January 2011 [tpl]es icon[/tpl]

==References==

==External links==


