[[Al Graf]]

CATEGORIES: 1958 births, Living people, Members of the New York State Assembly, New York City Police Department officers, New York Republicans, State University of New York at Plattsburgh alumni, Suffolk County, New York politicians, Town supervisors in New York, Touro Law Center alumni, United States Navy sailors

Alfred C. "Al" Graf (born February 13, 1958) is an American politician who is a member of the New York State Assembly.Voters Send Republican Al Graf to Albany - Patchogue, NY Patch A Long Island native, Graf was elected to represent the people of the 5th District in the New York State Assembly on November 2, 2010. He is a Republican.

==Education and career==

Graf was born and raised on Long Island and graduated from Farmingdale High School in 1976. He enlisted in the United States Navy in June 1976 and eventually rose to the rank of Operations Specialist Third Class Petty Officer. Graf received an honorable discharge in June 1980.
After returning to civilian life, Graf joined the New York City Police Department. He worked his way up from patrol to a plainclothes unit and was awarded numerous citations for exceptional police duty before being forced to retire due to an injury. He then worked for Wells Fargo Guard Services as an Accounts Manager.
After moving upstate to Saranac Lake, New York, Graf was elected as Supervisor for the Town of Brighton. After two terms as a town supervisor and at the age of 39, Graf went back to school. He received a Bachelors degree in Elementary Education from SUNY Plattsburgh and taught in an alternative education program for children. Graf later received a Juris Doctorate from Touro Law School.
In November 2010, he was elected to the State Assembly after defeating incumbent Assemblywoman Ginny Fields.Honoring Local Veterans - Sayville, NY Patch His district includes parts of the towns of Brookhaven and Islip including Bayport, Holbrook, Lake Ronkonkoma, Ronkonkoma, Oakdale, Sayville, and West Sayville, parts of Bohemia, Centereach, Farmingville, Holtsville, Selden, most of Fire Island (Kismet to Davis Park), Captree Island and Captree State Park.

==Personal life==

Graf lives in Holbrook, New York. He and his wife Mary have three children: Charles, Jean Marie, and Caitlin.

==References==

==External links==


