[[The Legend of Sun Knight]]

CATEGORIES: 2010 novels, Taiwanese novels, Manhua titles

The Legend of Sun Knight (simplified Chinese: 吾命骑士; traditional Chinese: 吾命騎士; Pinyin: wú mìng qíshì) is a 2010 Taiwanese novel by Yu Wo adapted into a manhua illustrated by Os Rabbit Cat. This work is based on an inspiration by the author to "expose a knight's true colors."[tpl]citation needed|date=June 2011[/tpl] It is written in a relaxed style, filled with nonsensical humor. Written in first person, the story takes place in a fantasy world where there are multiple gods and the earth is divided into many countries and religions. Among these religions, the Sanctuary of the God of Light is the one that has the longest history and is one of the three largest religions on the continent. The novel details the story of the Sanctuary of the God of Light's 38th generation Sun Knight, Grisia Sun, and his companions. Sun Knight appears to be a kind warrior that forgives even the worst criminals, but the reader learns that he actually hates having to talk about the Sun God every time he speaks. The story is, at first, a comedy-drama about the Sun Knight's antics in his facade of purity and chivalry, and progresses into his transformation into a Demon King and back into the Sun Knight.

==Plot==

The story takes place in a world somewhat reminiscent of Medieval period Europe. In this world, there are many Gods that get their power from the people that worship them. However, the Gods are forbidden from directly tampering with the human world. The more powerful Gods, in this case, the God of Light, grant certain humans some of their power in order to act out their will. The God of Light has twelve Knights to do so, led by the Sun Knight. With his enchanting blue eyes, shining golden hair and dazzling smile, he is the epitome of perfection—the perfect representative of justice and compassion. But in truth, the Sun Knight's true self is a cynical, sarcastic man who would rather be anything else than the overbearing Sun Knight who has to speak of the Light God in all his waking hours. However, he greatly cares for the lives of his fellow holy knights.

==The Twelve Holy Knights==

The twelve knights are divided into 2 factions; the warm and compassionate faction, as well as the cold and merciless faction.
The warm and compassionate faction consists of the following knights:
Sun Knight (Leader of The Twelve Holy Knights and warm-compassionate faction)
Grisia Sun
Age: 20+
Hair color: Gold; 
Eye color: Sky blue
Widely regarded as: The benevolent spokesperson of the God of Light, the man closest to perfection alive.
Aside from being the leader of the Twelve Holy Knights, the “good, warm-hearted” faction, and the Holy Temple itself, the 38th generation Sun Knight is also possibly one of the biggest frauds in the history of the continent. The reason is obviously because there is a scandalously big chasm between his appearance and his true personality. On the surface, the Sun Knight is a benevolent, forgiving man who is pure of mind, doesn’t drink, doesn’t swear, does everything gracefully, and smiles all the time; his best friend is the Earth Knight, his sworn enemy is the Judgment Knight, and apples are his favorite fruits.
Scratch away that veneer, however, and you will find a man with a head full of lecherous thoughts, a cellar full of wine, and a lot of swear words in his vocabulary. His real best friend is the Judgment Knight, the person he detests the most is the Earth Knight, and he hates apples with a passion that’s almost holy.
Aside from the…lapse in personality, there are also other ways in which Sun is not very knightly. For instance, to say that Sun’s skill with a sword is “not that good” would be quite a major understatement, since he is downright lousy at it and has a bad endurancet and can't ride a horse properly.  He is a horrible knight, but has holy power to rival the Pope, the religious Head of the Church of the God of Light. He also can sense the elements, and find all forms of magic, including dark magic and necromancy, easy. He can mimic magic that he has seen once and can perform magic with no incantation, however. His weapon (of choice…not) is the Divine Sun Sword.
Sun loves to eat extremely sweet stuff.
Neo Sun

Neo Sun was the 37th generation Sun Knight and Grisia's mentor. He was nicknamed "The Strongest Sun Knight in History." Grisia is afraid of him and obeys his orders. Neo, as a powerful swordsman, was upset about Grisia's lack of talent in that area, although he was amazed by Grisia's magic abilities. He grew up as part of the royal family, and always carries an air of dignity. He is a very abusive teacher and has no sense of direction, can't cook and mostly only thinks about swordsmanship. After he retired he became an adventurer. His companion is a dark elf mage called Aldrizzt.
Storm Knight
Ceo Storm
Nickname: Deatheo
Age: 20+
Hair color: Blue (dyed); Eye color: Green
Widely regarded as: A carefree, footloose charmer, the knight-representative of “freedom”.	
One of the members of the “good, warm-hearted” faction, the Storm Knight is, unfortunately enough for him, one of Sun’s subordinates. He may be the knight-representative of “freedom” and hence able to skip meetings on a regular basis, but for that very reason, most of the work – especially Sun’s – usually gets pushed onto him.Also, despite the Storm Knight’s reputation as a flirt, this particular Storm Knight seems to still be a virgin…
Blaze Knight
Chikus Blaze

Nickname: Freakus
Age: 20+
Hair color: Red; Eye color: Amber
Widely regarded as: A person with fiery red hair with a temper to match, and who worships the Sun Knight.
A member of the “good, warm-hearted” faction, Blaze is one of the rare members whose real personality matched the Blaze Knight persona. He is a strong swordsman who also specializes in purifying flames that could cleanse the spirit.
Leaf Knight
Elmairy Leaf
Nickname: Elm, Elmy, Strawberry
Age: 20+
Hair color: Green; Eye color: Gray-green
Widely regarded as: A truly nice guy.	
Yet another member of the “good, warm-hearted” faction, the Leaf Knight is a genuinely good-hearted person. He turns into a genuinely scary person, however, when you put a bow in his hands. According to Sun, Leaf can fire five arrows in ten seconds, with all of them hitting the bull’s eye. He can also run, leap, sing a song, turn his head to look at a hot babe, and turn the enemy into a hedgehog with his arrows, all at the same time. He specializes in ranged attacks, and his weapon is the Divine Leaf Bow. He likes to use vodo dolls .
Cloud Knight
Demos Cloud
Nickname: Didi
Age: 20+
Hair color: Pink; Eye color: Unknown
Widely regarded as: A free spirit who loves roaming and reading books.	
The Cloud Knight is the last member of the “good, warm-hearted” faction, but his presence is often forgotten. It is so easy to overlook his presence that he could follow Sun around half of the Holy Temple before Sun discovers him. He likes to hide inside bookshelf and he knows the location of every single book in the library. Cloud follows every instruction of the Sun Knight diligently (because the books said so). he likes to hide and is very obedient because when he was a little child he was kidnapped by bandits and held hostage for 3 years. His parents died when he was still young so he lived with his sister Aries.
Earth Knight
Georgo Earth

Age: 20+
Hair color: Brown; Eye color: Hazel
Widely regarded as: The yearly winner of “The Man Women Want Most as Their Husband” poll.
He may be a member of the “good, warm-hearted” faction, but if the Sun Knight is the #1 fraud in the history of the continent, then the Earth Knight would most definitely be #2.On the surface, the Earth Knight is Sun’s loyal, honest, and level-headed best friend. He is sincere and easily tongue-tied, especially when talking to girls. This, of course, accounts for his popularity among the ladies, and he has been ranked #1 on “The Man Women Want Most as Their Husband” poll for several years running. In truth, however, the Earth Knight is quite the lascivious villain. His number of romantic conquests could have been higher, however, but for the constant interference of a certain “best friend”, which is probably the reason why he loathes Sun deeply.
The Earth Knight specializes in defense, and his ultimate skill is “The Shield of Earth”.
The cold and merciless faction consists of the following knights:

Judgment Knight (Leader of cold-merciless faction)
Lesus Judgement
 formerly Lesus Lucen
Age: 20+
Hair color: Black; Eye color: Black
Widely regarded as: The most terrifying and cruelest of the Holy Knights, responsible for judging criminals.
The leader of the “cruel, cold-hearted” faction, the Judgment Knight – whose very name sends criminals quaking in their boots – spends his time (after interrogating criminals) in the toilet, throwing up and chatting with his “sworn enemy”, the Sun Knight. He first met Sun during their first practice quarrel, and the two have been fast friends ever since.he normally helps Grisia out very much. He buys him blueberry pie, beats up dogs that bite Grisia, beats up the bullies  .......
Chasel Judgement

He is the 37th generation Judgement Knight and Lesus mentor. has very long black hair. He still lives somewhere in the capital. He is nice, calm and good to get along with. He is a good friend of Neo.
Frost Knight
Ecilan Frost
Nickname: Wastelan
Age: 20+
Hair color: Light blue; Eye color: Blue-gray
Widely regarded as: A cold person who doesn’t like to talk much.	
A member of the “cruel, cold-hearted” faction, the Ice Knight usually has no expression on his face, which may mislead people into thinking that he really is a cruel, cold-hearted person. But really, cruel, cold-hearted people don’t usually make blueberry-flavored shaved ice for their enemies to eat on hot summer days, do they? Especially if the blueberry sauce is homemade…Ice’s fighting style is passive in nature. He can stand still for a whole day just waiting for his opponent to lunge his way, and then he will finish off his opponent with a single, fatal thrust. His weapon of choice is a giant, sharpened Popsicle, the Divine Ice Sword, that is. When he just accidentally patisiped at the ice knight selection. He was the son of a baker and wanted to become the best baker in the capital. He is on pretty good terms with Grisia Sun.
Moon Knight

Age: 20+
Hair color: Indigo; Eye color: Violet 
Weapon : whip
Widely regarded as: A famous loner and narcissist.
The Moon Knight is one of the more tragic members of the “cruel, cold-hearted” faction. Since he needs to keep his chin up permanently to create an haughty image, his neck muscles have stiffened to the point that he can’t lower his head anymore. This can be a problem if he accidentally drops some items or when he wants to kiss his girlfriend. As a result, he's girlfriend has ro be 180 cm tall and wear high heels. he totally adores his girlfriend .
Stone Knight
Aivis Stone
“I refuse to become more stubborn.” 
Age: 20+
Hair color: Brown; Eye color: Unknown
Widely regarded as: A very stubborn person.	
The Stone Knight belongs to the “cruel, cold-hearted” faction and is famous for his stubbornness that is as tough and unyielding as a rock. It is said that to crack his skull is a simple matter, but to break his stubbornness would be more difficult than overthrowing the Church of the God of Light. In reality, this generation’s Stone Knight is quite amiable and easy to get along with, but he adamantly refuses to become more stubborn.
Among the “cruel, cold-hearted” faction, the Stone Knight is the one who handles diplomacy.
Hell Knight
Elijah Hell

He was the actual 38th generation Hell Knight and is also a member of the Royal Knights. Elijah really wants leave his responsibility as a holy knight because he wants to become a full fledged Royal Knight that serves only the Royal Family. His main reason for leaving the holy temple was the Princess of the Kingdom of Forgotten Sound. Elijah is later engaged to the Princess, and Grisia Sun subtly allows him to leave and replaces him with Roland.
Roland Hell

Age: 20+
Hair color: Black hair streaked with silver; Eye color: Blue-green
Widely regarded as: A person who doesn’t date, doesn’t care for money, doesn’t gamble, doesn’t drink, doesn’t brawl, doesn’t…
The Hell Knight is the only knight who belongs to the “cruel, cold-hearted” faction but takes order from the Sun Knight. This sparked the rumors that Hell Knight in truth isn’t a real person, instead he was an identity assumed by the Sun Knight when he needed to carry out special missions. Roland isn’t the true Hell Knight successor makes more sense, grammatically, who should be chosen by the predecessor, but he takes on the Hell Knight identity under Sun’s instruction. He had been tortured to death by the Fat Pig King of the Kingdom of Forgotten Sound, and his sword skill is nearly unmatched both before and after his death. He was revived as a Death Knight due to his obsession of becoming the Sun Knight, and his obsession was so strong that it enable him to transform into a Death Lord. He has the power to summon undead and to teleport. His real identity of being a Death Lord is known only among the Twelve Holy Knights. He got to know Grisia at the Sun Knight selection but lost to Grisia. They are very good childhood friends.
Metal Knight
Laica Metal

Age: 20+
Hair color: Brown; Eye color: Unknown
Widely regarded as: A person with poisonous barbed tongue.	
The Metal Knight is a member of the “cruel, cold-hearted” faction, and it was rumored that if you speak to him for ten minutes, your lifespan will be shortened by a year. Contrary to his widely regarded persona, the Metal Knight can’t say anything poisonous. He actually complimented Sun as sparkly and pretty when he was trying to be poisonous. He likes to be beaten which is the reason why he likes Judge and Moon.
Each of the Twelve Holy Knights is in charge of a platoon of holy knights who directly report to them.
THE POPE
“Don’t you dare call me cute.” Real name: ???
Age: ???
Hair color: White; Eye color: Green
Widely regarded as: The most powerful member of the Church of the God of Light
Although he looks like a cute 15-year old boy, the Pope’s actual age is unknown. However, according to Neo Sun, the previous Sun Knight, he is at least sixty years old. He “manages” the finances of the Church of the God of Light (although he is a complete miser), and oversees the Holy Church, the faction of clerics. He is extremely shrewd and seems to be hiding many secrets, especially the one about him being rather adept at magic… He is also capable of using Resurrection with a 1/8 chance of a complete revival.
Pink necromancer
age : 2003
Hair color : blond 
Skin colour : pink
Widely regarded as : the necromancer that works for the church of good of light and the church
She is an undying lich which lives in a pink house, with pink chairs, pink walls, pink bed, pink pillows ...... she is addicted to strawberry sweets ( Lollipops ). She first looks like a little girl but later she switches to the body of an adult woman. She has a lot of very rare and precious items at her house. She wants to make Grisia her apprentice.
Adair
age : 20 +
Widely regarded as : the sun knights vice-captain
He is Sun's loyal and very competent Vice-Captain. He knows his Captain very well and is one of the 10 best swordsmen at the temple. He normally has to lead the Sun Knight Platoon alone because Grisia doesn't care. He usually wakes Grisia up and brings him his breakfast. He does a lot of Grisia's paperwork too.

==Spin-offs==

The Legend of Sun Knight has two spin-offs by Yu Wo. The first is a prequel about the first generation of the twelve holy knights (Female Warrior).[tpl]cite web|title=Female Warrior - Series Sypnosis|url=http://www.princerevolution.org/femalewarrior-main/|accessdate=14 March 2013[/tpl] She has released two volumes of Female Warrior, and has stated that it will be her next project. The second spin-off is a sequel about the 39th generation of the Twelve Holy Knights.[tpl]cite web|title=39th generation official announcement (Chinese)|url=http://www.wretch.cc/blog/kim1984429/13546270|publisher=Yu Wo[/tpl] There will only be three volumes about the 39th generation of the Twelve Holy Knights, of which only one has been released.

==References==

==External links==


