[[Daniel Alvarez (soccer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1978 births, Living people, American soccer coaches, American soccer players, New York Red Bulls players, Atlanta Silverbacks players, Charleston Battery players, Cincinnati Riverhawks players, Furman Paladins men's soccer players, Virginia Beach Mariners players, Virginia Beach Piranhas players, USL A-League players, USL Premier Development League players, New York Red Bulls draft picks, Colorado Rapids draft picks

Daniel Alvarez is a retired American soccer midfielder.
Alvarez graduated from Pine Forest High School.  He attended Furman University where he was a 1999 First Team All American.1999 All Americans  He graduated with a bachelor's degree in health and exercise science.  He was inducted into the Furman Paladins Hall of Fame in 2005.Furman Paladins Hall of Fame
In January 2000, the MetroStars selected Alvarez in the fourth round (thirty-seventh overall) of the 2000 MLS SuperDraft.  The MetroStars sent him on loan to the Atlanta Silverbacks for three games at the start of the USL A-League season.  On April 19, 2000, the MetroStars traded Alvarez to the Tampa Bay Mutiny in exchange for Daniel Hernández.April 19, 2000 Transactions  Alvarez chose to pursue a contract in Germany.  After unsuccessful trials with Borussia Dortmund, FC Cloppenburg, and FC Nurenburg, the returned to the United States and signed with the Charleston Battery of the USL A-League.  In the spring of 2001, Alvarez was training with the Mutiny when he tore his left anterior cruciate ligament.  He returned home to Fayetteville to recuperate.  While there, he coached with the Fayetteville Force Soccer Club.Fayetteville Force: Daniel Alvarez  In February 2002, the Colorado Rapids selected Alvarez in the third round (twenty-ninth overall) of the 2002 MLS SuperDraft.  The Rapids did not signe him and he began the 2002 season with the Cincinnati Riverhawks before finishing it with the Virginia Beach Mariners of the USL First Division.  He played for the Mariners through the 2004 season.
In 2005, he became an assistant with the Old Dominion University men's soccer team.

==References==

==External links==


