[[James Eastland]]

CATEGORIES: 1904 births, 1986 deaths, American anti-communists, Appointed United States Senators, Presidents pro tempore of the United States Senate, United States Senators from Mississippi, American planters, Mississippi Democrats, Vanderbilt University alumni, University of Alabama alumni, University of Mississippi alumni, Democratic Party United States Senators, People from Sunflower County, Mississippi

James Oliver Eastland (November 28, 1904[tpl]spaced ndash[/tpl] February 19, 1986) was an American politician from Mississippi who served in the United States Senate as a Democrat in 1941; and again from 1943 until his resignation December 27, 1978. From 1947 to 1978, he served alongside John Stennis, also a Democrat. At the time, Eastland and Stennis were the longest-serving Senate duo in American history, though their record was subsequently surpassed by Strom Thurmond and Ernest Hollings of South Carolina, who served together for thirty-six years. Eastland was also the most senior member of the Senate at the time of his retirement in 1978. He compiled a conservative record in support of the Conservative coalition.

==Early life==

Eastland was born in Doddsville, the son of Woods Caperton Eastland, a lawyer and cotton planter, and Alma Teresa (Austin) Eastland. In 1905 he moved with his parents to Forest where he attended public schools. Woods Eastland was active in politics and served as a district attorney. Eastland attended the University of Mississippi (1922-1924), Vanderbilt University (1925-1926), and the University of Alabama (1926-1927) before studying law with his father and attaining admission to the bar. A lawyer in rural Mississippi, he served one term in the state House of Representatives from 1928 to 1932. In the 1930s, he took over the family's Sunflower County plantation, which eventually grew to nearly [tpl]convert|6000|acre|km2[/tpl]. Even after entering politics, he considered himself first and foremost a cotton planter.

==Political career==

Eastland was first appointed to the Senate in 1941 by Governor Paul B. Johnson, Sr., following the death of Senator Pat Harrison.  Johnson first offered the appointment to Eastland's father, who declined and suggested his son.  Johnson then appointed James Eastland on the condition that he not run in the special election for the seat later in the year. Eastland kept his word and the election was won by 2nd District Congressman Wall Doxey. In 1942, Eastland was one of three candidates who challenged Doxey for a full term. Even though Doxey had the support of U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Mississippi's senior U.S. Senator, Theodore G. Bilbo, Eastland defeated him in the Democratic primary. In those days, winning the Democratic nomination was tantamount to election in Mississippi, and Eastland returned to the Senate on January 3, 1943.
FDR and Eastland developed a working relationship that enabled Eastland to oppose New Deal programs unpopular in Mississippi while he supported FDR's agenda on many other issues. This type of arrangement became the norm with presidents of both parties during his tenure in the Senate. As a result he was able to provide federal largess for Mississippi (including the Tennessee–Tombigbee Waterway and federal relief after Hurricane Camille) throughout his career.
In 1956, Eastland was appointed as chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee. Under the Senate's seniority rules, he was next in line for the chairmanship and there was no significant effort to deny him the post, which he held until his retirement.
He was re-elected five times, facing substantive GOP opposition only twice. In 1966, freshman congressman Prentiss Walker, the first Republican to represent Mississippi at the federal level since Reconstruction, ran against him. Former Republican Party state chairman Wirt Yerger had considered running against Eastland, but bowed out after Walker announced his candidacy.  Walker ran well to Eastland's right, accusing him of not having done enough to keep integration-friendly judges from being confirmed by the Senate. As is often the case when a one-term representative runs against a popular incumbent senator or governor, Walker was soundly defeated.  Years later, Yerger said that Walker's decision to relinquish his House seat after one term for the vagaries of a Senate race against Eastland was "very devastating" to the growth of the Mississippi GOP."Challenging the Status Quo: Rubel Lex Phillips and the Mississippi Republican Party (1963-1967)", The Journal of Mississippi History, XLVII, No. 4 (November 1985), p. 256 
In 1972, Eastland was reelected with 58 percent of the vote in his closest contest ever. His Republican opponent, Gil Carmichael, an automobile dealer from Meridian, might have been aided by President Richard Nixon's landslide reelection in 49 states, including 78 percent of Mississippi's popular vote. However, Nixon worked "under the table" to support Eastland, who was a long-time personal friend. Nixon and other Republicans provided little support for Carmichael to avoid alienating conservative Southern Democrats though the GOP did work to elect two House candidates who later became influential U.S. senators, Trent Lott and Thad Cochran. Eastland recognized that Nixon would handily carry Mississippi and did not endorse the national Democratic candidate, George McGovern of South Dakota. Four years later, Eastland supported the candidacy of fellow Southern Democrat Jimmy Carter of Georgia, rather than Nixon's heir, President Gerald R. Ford, Jr. Oddly, Eastland's former press secretary, Larry Speakes, a Mississippi native, was also a press spokesman for Gerald Ford and U.S. Senator Robert J. Dole in the latter's vice-presidential campaign on the Ford ticket.
During his last Senate term, he served as President pro tempore of the Senate since he was the longest-serving Democrat in the Senate.

==Views on civil rights and race==

Eastland is best known for his strong support of states' rights and for his opposition to the civil rights movement.
When the Supreme Court issued its decision in the landmark case Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas 347 US 483 (1954), Eastland, like most Southern Democrats, denounced it. In a speech given in Senatobia, Mississippi on August 12, 1955, he said: "On May 17, 1954, the Constitution of the United States was destroyed because of the Supreme Court's decision. You are not obliged to obey the decisions of any court which are plainly fraudulent sociological considerations."Eyes on the Prize: America's Civil Rights Years, 1954–1965, by Juan Williams, Viking Penguin, January 1, 1987, ISBN 978-0-670-81412-1, p. 38.
Eastland did not mince words when it came to his feelings about the races mingling. He testified to the Senate ten days after the Brown decision came down:
 The Southern institution of racial segregation or racial separation was the correct, self-evident truth which arose from the chaos and confusion of the Reconstruction period. Separation promotes racial harmony. It permits each race to follow its own pursuits, and its own civilization. Segregation is not discrimination... Mr. President, it is the law of nature, it is the law of God, that every race has both the right and the duty to perpetuate itself. All free men have the right to associate exclusively with members of their own race, free from governmental interference, if they so desire.[tpl]Citation needed|date=June 2009[/tpl] 
When three civil rights workers, namely Mickey Schwerner, James Chaney, and Andrew Goodman, went missing in Mississippi on June 21, 1964, he reportedly told President Lyndon Johnson that the incident was a hoax and there was no Ku Klux Klan in the state, surmising that the three had gone to Chicago:WhiteHouseTapes.org :: The secret White House tapes and recordings of Presidents Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, Roosevelt, Truman, and Eisenhower
Johnson once said that, "Jim Eastland could be standing right in the middle of the worst Mississippi flood ever known, and he'd say the niggers caused it, helped out by the Communists."[tpl]cite book | last =Schlesinger| first =Arthur M.| title =Robert Kennedy and His Times | publisher =Houghton Mifflin Books |pages =234| year =2002 | isbn =0-618-21928-5[/tpl]
Eastland, along with Senators Robert Byrd, John McClellan, Olin D. Johnston, Sam Ervin, and Strom Thurmond, made unsuccessful attempts to block Thurgood Marshall's confirmation to the Federal Court of Appeals and the Supreme Court.
Eastland, like most of his southern colleagues, opposed the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Its passage caused many Mississippi Democrats to openly support Barry Goldwater's presidential bid that year, but Eastland did not publicly oppose the election of Lyndon Johnson.  In fact, four years earlier he had quietly supported John F. Kennedy's presidential campaign though Mississippi voted that year for unpledged electors.  Although Goldwater was heavily defeated by incumbent Lyndon Johnson, he carried Mississippi with 87 percent of the popular vote (his best showing in any stateDave Leip's Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections - Data Graphs) because of opposition to the Civil Rights Act of 1964.[tpl]Citation needed|date=October 2008[/tpl]
Eastland was often at odds with Johnson's policy on civil rights, but their friendship remained close and Johnson often sought Eastland's support and guidance on other issues, such as the failed Chief Justice nomination of Abe Fortas in 1968.[ref]
