[[Central Synagogue, Sydney]]

CATEGORIES: Synagogues in Sydney

The Central Synagogue of Sydney is one of Australia's largest synagogues, and possibly the "largest synagogue in the Southern hemisphere."Home 
The Central Synagogue was formed as the Surry Hills congregation in 1912 with the aim of introducing Eastern European custom into Sydney, and to arrest the drift from Judaism.Suzanne D. Rutland -The Jews in Australia 2005 Page 31   "The Central Synagogue was formed in 1912 with the aim of introducing the Polish minhag (custom) into Sydney," The Bondi-Waverley congregation, established in 1918, and merged with that of Surry Hills in March 1921, to form the Eastern Suburbs Central Synagogue at Bondi Junction. The Central Synagogue was firstly an endeavour to provide more accommodation for worship in the Eastern Suburbs, but also, at least initially, intended to provide a less anglicised environment than that found at the Great Synagogue.The Great Synagogue: A History of Sydney's Big Shule - Page 38 Raymond Apple, Great Synagogue (Sydney, N.S.W.) - 2008 "The Eastern Suburbs Central Synagogue was seen both as an endeavour to provide more synagogue accommodation and a reaction against the anglicised nature of the Great Synagogue. Its main concern was to arrest the drift from Judaism and ... The foundation stone was laid by the Chief Rabbi of the British Empire, Dr J. H. Hertz.The Australian encyclopaedia: Volume 1  1958 "During his term a number of synagogues were built in Sydney, the main one being the Central Synagogue (Bondi Junction), whose foundation stone was laid by the Chief Rabbi of the British Empire, Dr JH Hertz, in April 1921."Sydney's Jewish community: materials for a post-War (II) history, Hans Kimmel, Joseph Staedter - 1955 "Israel Brodie, lay the foundation stone of the new Central Synagogue to be built at Bon Accord Avenue, Bondi Junction. With a silver trowel, the Rabbi performed the ceremony then recited the appropriate prayer after reading the ..."Israel, the Diaspora, and Jewish identity - Page 266 Danny Ben-Moshe, Zohar Segev - 2007 "In the 1960s, Netzer, the international Zionist youth movement of Reform Judaism, was founded in Australia, ... Commencing in 1975 as a local synagogue youth group connected with Central Synagogue in Sydney, in recent years it has ..."

==References==


