[tpl]subscription required[/tpl]</ref> The national mood was soon depressed by news of successive reverses; at [[Battle of Sedan (1870)|Sedan]] on 2 September the French armies suffered an overwhelming defeat; Napoleon was captured and deposed, and the [[Second Empire (France)|Second Empire]] came to a sudden end.<ref name= Curtiss259/>
Bizet greeted with enthusiasm the proclamation in Paris of the Third Republic.
The new government did not sue for peace, and by 17 September the Prussian armies had surrounded Paris.Steen, p. 594 Unlike Gounod, who fled to England,Curtiss, p. 263 Bizet rejected opportunities to leave the besieged city: "I can't leave Paris! It's impossible! It would be quite simply an act of cowardice", he wrote to Mme Halévy. Life in the city became frugal and harsh,[tpl]#tag:ref|Although there were few instances of actual starvation during the Siege, infant mortality rose considerably because of a shortage of milk. The main sources of meat were horses and domestic pets: "It has been calculated that during the entire Siege 65,000 horses, 5,000 cats and 1,200 dogs were eaten".Steen, p. 596|group= n[/tpl] although by October there were efforts to re-establish normality. Pasdeloup resumed his regular Sunday concerts, and on 5 November the Opéra reopened with excerpts from works by Gluck, Rossini and Meyerbeer.Curtiss, p. 268
An armistice was signed on 26 January 1871, but the departure of the Prussian troops from Paris in March presaged a period of confusion and civil disturbance. Following an uprising, the city's municipal authority was taken over by dissidents who established the Paris Commune.Steen, pp. 598–601 Bizet decided that he was no longer safe in the city, and he and Geneviève escaped to Compiègne. Later they moved to Le Vésinet where they sat out the two months of the Commune, within hearing distance of the gunfire that resounded as government troops gradually crushed the uprising: "The cannons are rumbling with unbelievable violence", Bizet wrote to his mother-in-law on 12 May.Dean (1965), p. 87 By 25 May hostilities had ended; it was later estimated that during the Commune and in the reprisals which followed, around 25,000 lives had been lost.Steen, p. 602

===Late career===

====Djamileh, L'Arlésienne and Don Rodrigue====

As life in Paris returned to normal, in June 1871 Bizet's appointment as chorus-master at The Opéra was seemingly confirmed by its director, Émile Perrin. Bizet was due to begin his duties in October, but on 1 November the post was assumed by Hector Salomon. In her biography of Bizet, Mina Curtiss surmises that he either resigned or refused to take up the position as a protest against what he thought was the director's unjustified closing of Ernest Reyer's opera Erostrate after only two performances.Curtiss, pp. 315–17 Bizet resumed work on Clarissa Harlowe and Grisélidis, but plans for the latter to be staged at the Opéra-Comique fell through, and neither work was finished; only fragments of their music survive.Dean (1965), pp. 91–95 Bizet's other completed works in 1871 were the piano duet entitled Jeux d'enfants, and a one-act opera, Djamileh, which opened at the Opéra-Comique in May 1872. It was poorly staged and incompetently sung; at one point the leading singer missed 32 bars of music. It closed after 11 performances, not to be heard again until 1938.Dean (1965), pp. 96–98 On 10 July Geneviève gave birth to the couple's only child, a son, Jacques.Curtiss, pp. 329–30
Bizet's next major assignment came from Carvalho, who was now managing Paris's Vaudeville theatre and wanted incidental music for Alphonse Daudet's play L'Arlésienne. When the play opened on 1 October the music was dismissed by critics as too complex for popular taste. However, encouraged by Reyer and Massenet, Bizet fashioned a four-movement suite from the music,Curtiss, pp. 332–40 which was performed under Pasdeloup on 10 November to an enthusiastic reception.[tpl]#tag:ref|A second L'Arlésienne suite was prepared by Guiraud and performed in 1879, four years after Bizet's death. This is generally known as L'Arlésienne suite No. 2.Curtiss, p. 332|group= n[/tpl] In the winter of 1872–73, Bizet supervised preparations for a revival of the still-absent Gounod's Roméo et Juliette at the Opéra-Comique. Relations between the two had been cool for some years, but Bizet responded positively to his former mentor's request for help, writing: "You were the beginning of my life as an artist. I spring from you".Curtiss, p. 342
In June 1872 Bizet informed Galabert: "I have just been ordered to compose three acts for the Opéra-Comique. Henri Meilhac and Ludovic Halévy are doing my piece".Dean (1965), p. 100 The subject chosen for this project was Prosper Mérimée's short novel Carmen. Bizet began the music in the summer of 1873, but the Opéra-Comique's management was concerned about the suitability of this risqué story for a theatre that generally provided wholesome entertainment, and work was suspended.Schonberg (Vol. II), p. 36 Bizet then began composing Don Rodrigue, an adaptation of the El Cid story by Louis Gallet and Édouard Blau. He played a piano version to a select audience that included the Opéra's principal baritone Jean-Baptiste Faure, hoping that the singer's approval might influence the directors of the Opéra to stage the work.Dean (1965), p. 107 However, on the night of 28–29 October, the Opéra burned to the ground; the directors, amid other pressing concerns, set Don Rodrigue aside.Curtiss, pp. 352–53 It was never completed; Bizet later adapted a theme from its final act as the basis of his 1875 overture, Patrie.

====Carmen====

Adolphe de Leuven, the co-director of the Opéra-Comique most bitterly opposed to the Carmen project, resigned early in 1874, removing the main barrier to the work's production. Bizet finished the score during the summer and was pleased with the outcome: "I have written a work that is all clarity and vivacity, full of colour and melody".Dean (1965), p. 108 The renowned mezzo-soprano Célestine Galli-Marié (known professionally as "Galli-Marié") was engaged to sing the title role. According to Dean she was as delighted by the part as Bizet was by her suitability for it. There were rumours that he and the singer pursued a brief affair; his relations with Geneviève were strained at this time, and they lived apart for several months.Dean (1965), pp. 110–11
When rehearsals began in October 1874 the orchestra had difficulties with the score, finding some parts unplayable.Dean (1980), pp. 758–60 The chorus likewise declared some of their music impossible to sing, and were dismayed that they had to act as individuals, smoking and fighting onstage rather than merely standing in line.McClary, p. 24 Bizet also had to counter further attempts at the Opéra-Comique to modify parts of the action which they deemed improper. Only when the leading singers threatened to withdraw from the production did the management give way.Dean (1965), pp. 112–14McClary, p. 23 Resolving these issues delayed the first night until 3 March 1875 on which morning, by chance, Bizet's appointment as a Chevalier of the Legion of Honour was announced.
Among leading musical figures at the premiere were Jules Massenet, Camille Saint-Saëns and Charles Gounod. Geneviève, suffering from an abscess in her right eye, was unable to be present.Curtiss, p. 387 The opera's first performance extended to four-and-a-half hours; the final act did not begin until after midnight.Sheen, pp. 604–05 Afterwards, Massenet and Saint-Saëns were congratulatory, Gounod less so. According to one account he accused Bizet of plagiarism: "Georges has robbed me! Take the Spanish airs and mine out of the score and there remains nothing to Bizet's credit but the sauce that masks the fish".Curtiss, p. 391[tpl]#tag:ref|The acknowledged Spanish melodies are the Habañera, which uses a popular tune by Sebastián Iradier, and the entr'acte to Act 4 which is based on an aria from Manuel Garcia's opera El criado fingido.McClary, p. 26Locke, pp. 318–19|group= n[/tpl] Much of the press comment was negative, expressing consternation that the heroine was an amoral seductress rather than a woman of virtue. Galli-Marié's performance was described by one critic as "the very incarnation of vice".Dean (1965), p. 117 Others complained of a lack of melody, and made unfavourable comparisons with the traditional Opéra-Comique fare of Auber and Boieldieu. Léon Escudier in L'Art Musical called the music "dull and obscure ... the ear grows weary of waiting for the cadence that never comes".Dean (1965), p. 118 There was, however, praise from the poet Théodore de Banville, who applauded Bizet for presenting a drama with real men and women instead of the usual Opéra-Comique "puppets".Curtiss, pp. 408–09 The public's reaction was lukewarm, and Bizet soon became convinced of its failure: "I foresee a definite and hopeless flop".Dean (1965), p. 116

===Illness and death===

