[[LSWR suburban lines]]

CATEGORIES: Railway lines in England

This article deals with the development of the London suburban railway lines of the London and South Western Railway (LSWR). For the wider view of the LSWR in general, see London and South Western Railway.
The London and Southampton Railway opened its main line progressively from 1838, and soon changed its name to the London and South Western Railway. It was immediately successful, especially for passenger traffic, and the company quickly extended south-west and west to Gosport, Dorchester and Salisbury. At the same time it energetically developed suburban branch lines in the territory towards Richmond, Windsor and beyond, and to Epsom and Guildford.
It is these latter lines and train services that form the scope of this article. The "suburban area" is taken in this article to include the LSWR lines in what is now Greater London, and extending to Twickenham and Windsor in the north, and Epsom and Leatherhead in the south, as well as suburban development on the main line as far as Weybridge and the Chertsey branch. Of course when the first lines were being promoted, the towns they served were not considered to be "suburban" to London; that is a twentieth century railway usage.

==The first main line==

The London and Southampton Railway opened its main line between the two named places progressively from 1838, completing the route on 11 May 1840. The London terminal was at Nine Elms. Passenger traffic was extremely buoyant, and racegoers overwhelmed the capacity of the Company's trains in the second week of operation. The Company had been frustrated over early intentions to reach Bristol, and harboured the objective of securing territory west of Southampton, but it did not neglect the potential of local traffic closer to London, and early timetables show two types of passenger train service: throughout from London to Southampton, in many cases omitting station calls nearer to London, but also local trains from London to Weybridge.R A Williams, The London & South Western Railway, Volume 1: The Formative Years, David & Charles, Newton Abbot, 1968, ISBN 0-7153-4188-X, Chapter 2
The London terminal at Nine Elms on the River Thames afforded onward travel to central London by river steamer. The location was never intended as a permanent London passenger terminal; an extension eastwards was contemplated in 1836, and was decided upon in 1844. For the time being "The London passenger found it more convenient than other companies' stations. He might leave it by road and frequently dip his hand for Turnpike tolls, or for 3d choose the steamer Citizen, or the opposing Bridegroom, to reach the capital by river, cursing his choice when the rival vessel arrived and cleared the other queue while his own waited half an hour."Williams, chapter 6
The stations as far as Weybridge were
The London and  Southampton Railway changed its name to the London and South Western Railway on 4 June 1839.Williams, Volume 1, page 122

===Kingston-upon-Railway===

The important town of Kingston upon Thames was well established long before the arrival of the railway. When the main line was built, it passed about a mile south of the town; nonetheless a station was provided, called Kingston.
The existence of the station, and the convenience of travelling to London from the new station, encouraged house building closer to the station, and for a time the settlement may have been known as Kingston-upon-Railway. The 1841 Year Book of Facts says
 Railway town—Upon the South-western line a new town, called Kingston-upon-Railway, is fast rising, 800 houses being built or in progress.The Year-Book of Facts in Science and Art, Tilt and Bogue, London, 1841 
The station name later changed from Kingston to Surbiton, and later Ordnance Survey maps name the district simply as Surbiton. The Year Book may simply have been indulging in whimsy, but some serious modern writers have included this as factual, among them Gillham, writing in 2007,Gillham, page 7, implying it was the station name and C Hamilton Ellis.C Hamilton Ellis, The South Western Railway, George Allen & Unwin Ltd, London, second impression, 1962

==Early extensions, to 1850==

===Richmond===

thumb|The LSWR suburban area system at the end of 1850Early in the life of the new railway, Richmond had become a favoured residential are generating significant travel to and from London: 98 omnibuses made the journey each way daily in 1844. Local promoters developed a scheme for a railway from Richmond to join the LSWR at Wandsworth, and also to extend the LSWR line eastwards from near Nine Elms to Hungerford and Waterloo Bridges. Responsibility for the eastward extension passed to the LSWR, but the Richmond Railway Act received the Royal Assent on 21 July 1845. Three LSWR directors were on the board of the new company. The capital was £260,000.E F Carter, An Historical Geography of the Railways of the British Isles, Cassell, London, 1959
Construction was remarkably swift, and the line opened on 27 July 1846.Sam Fay, A Royal Road, 1973 reprint of 1882 original, E P Publishing, Wakefield, ISBN 0 85409 769 4 There was a 1,000 feet (305 m) long viaduct at Wandsworth over the River Wandle and the Surrey Iron Railway and a deep cutting at Putney, but otherwise the works were comparatively light.
The line ran through Mortlake, Barnes, Putney and Wandsworth with stations at those places; the Wandsworth station was close to the present Wandsworth Town station, and some way from the LSWR Wandsworth station, which was renamed Clapham Common at the same time. The line joined the LSWR line at Falcon Bridge, located at the present Falcon Road, and ran alongside it, forming four tracks to Nine Elms.Ordnance Survey Town Plan of London, 1:5280, dated 1850 The Richmond terminus was on the east side of Kew Road but somewhat to the south of the present station, about where Drummond Place is now.Ordnance Survey Town Plan of Richmond, 1:1056, dated 1867
There were 17 trains each way between Richmond and Nine Elms.
The Richmond company negotiated with the LSWR to sell their line, and after some prevarication a merger was agreed, with a share exchange valuing Richmond shares at a premium, and with a Richmond director appointed to the LSWR board when a vacancy arose. The merger took effect on 31 December 1846.

===Waterloo===

The Nine Elms station was never intended to be a permanent London terminal, and in 1845 the LSWR obtained powers to extend eastwards to a new terminal station, called Waterloo Bridge, from its proximity to the river crossing. (The name was changed to the more familiar Waterloo in 1886.) A second Act in 1847 authorised the provision of two additional tracks, reflecting the fact that the Richmond Railway opened in 1846, its line running independently to Nine Elms alongside the original L&SR line. There were therefore to be four tracks all the way from Falcon Road to Waterloo Bridge.
Running through a residential area, the construction displaced about 700 houses. Starting from an embankment near  Nine Elms, most of the line was on viaduct as was Waterloo station itself. There was one intermediate station at Vauxhall. The line and the new stations opened on 11 July 1848. Waterloo Bridge station occupied ten acres, with six tracks serving four platforms, roughly where platforms 9 to 12 are at present. The station accommodation was of a temporary nature only.John C Gillham, The Waterloo & City Railway, The Oakwood Press, Usk, 2001, ISBN 0 85361 525 XH P White, London Railway History, David & Charles, Newton Abbot, 1963 revised 1971, ISBN 0 7153 6145 7
It was aligned so as to enable further eastward extension, and on 26 August 1846 the LSWR obtained an Act permitting an extension to Borough High Street, facing the London Bridge station of the South Eastern Railway (SER). This would give access to the City of London without having to construct a railway bridge over the River Thames. Some land acquisition was completed, but in the slump following the railway mania the Company reflected on the huge cost of constructing an inner-urban line, and allowed the powers to lapse.

===On to Windsor, and a Hounslow loop===

thumb|Putney (Town) station at street levelThis period in 1846 was the time of the railway mania, when all manner of railway schemes were being promoted with the promise, often unfulfilled, of making subscribers rich. The LSWR was not to be left behind, and now was pressing the Richmond line westwards, but was beset with multiple independent schemes competing for the same territory. These included, in 1846, a Windsor, Slough and Staines Atmospheric Railway which would probably have been broad gauge. However it was induced to join with a Richmond and Staines Junction Railway—of course neither company had any actual railway—to form a Windsor, Staines and South Western Railway company (WS&SWR), dropping the intention to build an atmospheric railway. The new company was friendly to the LSWR and had Joseph Locke as its engineer.
The Company obtained a No. 1 Act on 25 June 1847; with a capital of £500,000 it was to build a line from a junction with the Richmond line a little to the east of Richmond station, passing to the north of the original terminus and crossing the River Thames, and running through Twickenham and Staines to a terminus at Black Potts. This was an uninhabited location on the Thames 1,100 yards (1 km) north-west of Datchet, and was obviously the jumping-off point for an approach to Windsor, not yet authorised. However it did authorise the Company to conclude an agreement with the Commissioners of Woods and Forests to pay £60,000 for improvements to Windsor Great Park; this was obviously a thinly disguised enabling payment to build onto Windsor. The No. 1 Act also authorised a new line from Barnes, crossing the Thames and running through Brentford and Isleworth to Hounslow, and rejoining the Twickenham - Staines line.
The Great Western Railway (GWR) were also anxious to get access to Windsor, for the considerable prestige of serving Queen Victoria, and they had secured friendlier treatment from the Commissioners over getting a line approved. For a time it appeared that the GWR would succeed and the WS&SWR company, having paid the £60,000, would be refused. However at last both companies obtained approval to come to Windsor, and on 26 June 1849 the WS&SWR got its Act, permitting a Windsor station not quite so convenient as they had hoped for. Stringent conditions were imposed to protect scholars at Eton College from being enabled to use the railway illicitly.
thumb|Richmond Railway BridgeBy now the railway mania was over and money was difficult to get, but the line from Richmond to Datchet was opened to the public on 22 August 1848. The extension to Windsor was delayed when the piers of the Thames bridge at Black Potts settled, and the line was opened belatedly on 1 December 1849, 8 weeks after the GWR had reached its own Windsor station. Even then it was to a cramped temporary station; opening of the lavish permanent station, with Royal waiting room and cavalry entrance, was seventeen months later, on 1 May 1851.
Meanwhile the Hounslow loop line had been progressing more slowly, reaching Smallberry Green, a little to the east of the later Isleworth station, on 22 August 1849, and completed to what is now Feltham Junction on 1 February 1850.
The WS&SWR merged by share transfer with the LSWR on 30 June 1850.

===Chertsey and Hampton Court===

The LSWR obtained an Act on 16 July 1846 authorising a line from Weybridge via Chertsey to a terminus near Staines bridge, on the south side at Egham. In fact the Windsor, Staines and South Western Railway No 2 Act (the No 1 Act was described under Windsor, above) modified this to terminate at Chertsey, Parliament preferring to let the WS&SWR take the territory between Staines and Pirbright with a southerly Chertsey branch. In fact the slump following the railway mania killed off this WS&SWR scheme, but by then the LSWR was opening from Weybridge to Chertsey, on 14 February 1848.
thumb|Hampton Court station at its openingHampton Court Palace was a major attraction even at this date, with 178,000 visitors annually, and a branch was proposed, and opened on 1 February 1849. Cobb states that the intermediate station at Thames Ditton was opened in 1851, but Butt says that it opened with the opening of the branch.R V J Butt, The Directory of Railway Stations, Patrick Stephens Limited, Sparkford, 1995, ISBN 1 85260 508 1 The branch was worked by horse traction at first, a vehicle being detached from main line trains at the junction. By 1855 trains from London worked through in the ordinary way.J Spencer Gilks, Railway Development at Kingston-upon-Thames — 1 in the Railway Magazine, July 1958

==Waterloo and eastwards aspirations==

Having reached Waterloo, the LSWR still harboured a desire to get nearer to the City of London, which was the chief destination of arriving passengers. The unsatisfactory station at Waterloo Bridge was added to incrementally in 1854, 1860, 1869, 1875, 1878 and 1885, with no coherent plan.
It was the South Eastern Railway who made the first move in 1859, however, promoting and largely funding a London Bridge and Charing Cross Railway (CCR), which obtained an Act for a line to Charing Cross. It was to have three tracks; there would be no Waterloo station, but there was to be a 5 chain (100 metre) connection to the LSWR Waterloo Bridge station. It was authorised as double track, but was actually built as single. The cost of all alterations at the LSWR station was to be borne by the CCR. The CCR line was opened to traffic on 11 January 1864, but the branch into the LSWR station was "opened" but no trains ran.
The LSWR had opposed the CCR scheme in Parliament as a tactic to get access for its passengers to London Bridge station; but the SER did not wish for this, and it had outflanked the LSWR. The CCR said that they had fulfilled their obligations under the Act by building the connecting line. After much argument, the SER proposed a service jointly with the London and North Western Railway (LNWR); it ran from Euston via Willesden and Kensington, to be worked by the LSWR from Kensington; this started running on 1 July 1865. Although London Bridge station was near to the City of London, it was on the south of the river, and by now Cannon Street station, much more conveniently situated on the north, was only 300 yards (274 m) from the Bank of England. The station was about to be opened: the LSWR asked for the trains to be allowed to run to that station. The SER replied requiring either very high charges for the facility, or alternatively running powers for themselves to any point on the LSWR within 26 miles (42 km) of London.
This was obviously impossible and further difficult negotiations took place, during which the Euston - Waterloo - London Bridge service was discontinued, apparently late in 1866. On 1 February 1867 a new service started from Willesden via Kensington and Waterloo to Cannon Street. Engine and crew changes took place at Kensington (from LNWR to LSWR) and Waterloo (LSWR to SER). Late in 1867 the SER again gave notice to discontinue the service and the last service train ran over the Waterloo connection on 31 December 1867. A few van shunts, and also the Royal Train, were the only movements over the line after that. The next month the SER was negotiating an amalgamation with the London, Brighton and South Coast Railway (LBSCR) and the London, Chatham and Dover Railway (LC&DR). The LSWR was invited to join too, but refused and when the others went to Parliament for authority, the LSWR opposed the Bill. The SER now agreed to build the Waterloo station on the Charing Cross line if the LSWR would withdraw its opposition.
This was agreed, and "Waterloo Junction" station opened on 1 January 1869; the amalgamation plans of the other railways foundered meanwhile. Waterloo Junction was renamed plain Waterloo on 7 July 1935, and Waterloo East on 2 May 1977.

==More branches, 1851 to 1862==

===North and South Western Junction===

thumb|The LSWR suburban system in 1862The proximity of the unconnected railways immediately west of London led to a number of failed schemes, until in 1851 the North and South Western Junction Railway (N&SWJR) built a line just under 4 miles long from an east-facing junction at Willesden to Kew Junction, facing west about half a mile on the London side of Brentford.
The line was to be worked by the LSWR and the London & North Western Railway (LNWR) jointly, but at first the larger companies delayed providing the trains service. Eventually a goods service was started on 15 February 1853, followed by passenger traffic on 1 August 1853: four North London Railway trains daily ran from Hampstead Road (connection from Fenchurch Street) to Kew; the N&SWJR had its own Kew station just short of the LSWR line—a temporary platform at first.Joe Brown, London Railway Atlas, second edition, 2010, Ian Allan Publishing Ltd, Hersham, ISBN 978 0 7110 3397 9
Overcoming the reluctance of the LSWR, the N&SWJR started to run through to Windsor, with three additional trains from Hampstead Road to Windsor from 1 June 1854. However the service lasted until October 1854 only.

===Curves at Kew and Barnes===

Responding to pressure for alternative services to the Richmond area, the LSWR arranged with the N&SWJR to run a Twickenham - Richmond - Hampstead Road service, reversing at Barnes and again at Kew; some LSWR coaches apparently worked through to Fenchurch Street. The service started on 20 May 1858. The two reversals were obviously extremely inconvenient, and the LSWR, warming to the N&SWJR, obtained powers to build an east curve at Kew and a west curve at Barnes; they opened on 1 February 1862. Williams points out that the passenger timings hardly improved, the Kew Junction to Richmond times reducing from 19 minutes to 16 minutes. The junction with the LSWR was close to its Kew station and it built platforms on the east curve for the new train service. The original Kew Junction was renamed Old Kew Junction, and the new east-facing junction was New Kew Junction.

===Vauxhall station fire===

thumb|Contemporary engraving of the Vauxhall station fireThe Vauxhall station building burnt down in a catastrophic fire on Sunday 13 April 1856; the fire was observed at 8.15 p.m. to be burning a canvas and paper wall in a passage leading to some offices. A train actually passed through the conflagration and another stopped at the station to set down passengers, before the local traffic manager was able to take charge and divert up trains to the old Nine Elms station. The entire timber station building burnt down. Nonetheless the permanent way was not much damaged and trains ran as usual the following day.The Illustrated London News, 19 April 1856

===Epsom and Leatherhead===

In the early years of the 1840s the thoughts of the Company turned to the area towards Epsom and beyond. However both the London and Brighton Railway and the London and Croydon Railway considered the area attractive to them, and the area might also serve as a conduit towards Portsmouth. A series of bilateral agreements were concluded undertaking not to encroach on other lines' presumed areas of influence.Nowadays competition law would prohibit such arrangements.
At this period Parliament commissioned an external panel of experts, the so-called Railway Kings, to adjudicate preference between competing schemes and to asess practicability and desirability, and this led to the suppression in 1844 of a LSWR proposal to reach Epsom; a further Bill was rejected in 1846. However in that year the London, Brighton and South Coast Railway (LB&SCR) was formed by the amalgamation of the Croydon and Brighton companies, and in 1847 the LBS&CR opened a line from its (West) Croydon station to Epsom. The LSWR turned its focus more towards Portsmouth, Guildford and Chichester, and these areas proved contentious.
In 1855-1856 two semi-independent companies were promoted, the Epsom and Leatherhead Railway (E&LR) and the Wimbledon and Dorking Railway (W&DR). They obtained Parliamentary authorisation, the E&LR on 14 July 1856, to run from the LB&SCR station at Epsom to Leatherhead. The W&DR obtained authority on 27 July 1856 for a line from near Wimbledon to join the E&LR a little to the west of the LB&SCR Epsom station, and also to build from Leatherhead to Dorking.
The W&DR was dependent on the LSWR, but the E&LR was independent, and looking for a larger company to work it, it found the LSWR unwilling, because of its territorial agreement with the LB&SCR. The E&LR directors now approached the LB&SCR who agreed to work the line, in contravention of the same agreement. However E&LR shareholder dissatisfaction was evident, not least because the LB&SCR route to London (London Bridge station via Croydon) was much longer than the route to Waterloo. An Extraordinary General Meeting was called, and the Board was instructed to negotiate further with the LSWR, and this resulted in the LSWR winning control of the E&LR. They leased and opened the single track line on 1 February 1859 between Epsom (LB&SCR station) and Leatherhead. The LSWR provided seven trains daily, connecting with the LBSCR trains at Epsom.
Soon the LSWR was able to open the leased W&DR line between Wimbledon and the junction near Epsom, on 4 April 1859, enabling their trains to run to Leatherhead. Wimbledon station was then south-west of Wimbledon Bridge, and the new line ran parallel to the main line from there as far as the present-day Raynes Park station, and then diverged to the south. At first there was no Epsom station on the route, but four days later Parliament authorised the construction of a new station at the junction. It was built so that trains from the LB&SCR station passed through, platforms only being provided for trains from the Wimbledon line. As the station was enlarged, and the line doubled, this arrangement was perpetuated, with two central through tracks to and from the LB&SCR station, a main down platform for the Wimbledon trains, and an Up island platform; the southern face of that platform was used for terminating trains from Wimbledon. This arrangement was perpetuated until 1929.Vic Mitchell and Keith Smith, London Suburban Railways, West Croydon to Epsom, Middleton Press, Midhurst, 1992, ISBN 1 873793 08 1
On 29 July 1859 the LB&SCR and the LSWR agreed to make the E&LR joint between them, and to double it when required, and from 8 August 1859 LB&SCR trains started running over the E&LR. The joint ownership of the E&LR was authorised by Parliament, and was approved by shareholders on 30 September 1861.Williams, Chapter 5

===Wokingham===

When the proposals to extend westward from Staines failed in Parliament, the depression following the Railway Mania was in ever deeper, and the LSWR did not progress the schemes further. Local interests were reluctant to see their railway ignored, and the Staines, Wokingham and Woking Junction Railway was formed,Carter refers to this as the Staines, Wokingham and Reading Railway, as does Bradshaw's Railway Manual for 1867. being incorporated on 8 July 1853 to make a line from Staines (LSWR) to a junction with the South Eastern Railway's Redhill, Guildford and Reading line at Wokingham. Also included were powers to make a branch to Woking via Chobham. Running powers over the SER line were obtained, and narrow gauge track into Reading station on the Great Western Railway gave the SW&WJR trains access to Reading.
The line opened from Staines to Ascot on 4 June 1856, and from there to Wokingham on 9 July 1856. In 1857 Bradshaw's Railway Manual reported that "The branch to Woking is not yet commenced, and a bill is being promoted for its abandonment." The branch to Woking is not further described by Carter or Williams. The Wokingham line was worked by the LSWR and later absorbed by it.Col M H Cobb, The Railways of Great Britain -- A Historical Atlas, Ian Allan Publishing Limited, Shepperton, 2003, ISBN 07110 3003 0Bradshaw's Railway Manual, Shareholder's Guide and Official Directory for 1867, Vol XIX, London and Manchester, 1867

===Wraysbury station moved===

Wraysbury station was moved about a quarter mile towards Staines on 1 April 1861. The original location was served only by a footpath; this inconvenient earlier location may have been due to objection by the occupier of Wyrardisbury House. The new station is, apparently incorrectly, referred to as Wyrardisbury on the Ordnance Survey maps of the period.Ordnance Survey maps, e.g. 1:2,500, 1869 etc.

==From 1862 to 1869==

===Eastward to the City of London===

thumb|The LSWR suburban system in 1869After the extension to Waterloo Bridge in 1848, the Company had at last got a terminal reasonably close to the commercial areas of London. Yet as business travel increased over the years, the inconvenience of the location south of the River Thames and somewhat west of the City of London became increasingly objectionable. However early efforts to get access to Cannon Street had seen short-lived success, and the South Eastern Railway had been an extremely difficult partner.
The LSWR had more success with another eastern company, the London, Chatham and Dover Railway (LC&DR). By Acts of 1860 and 1861 the LC&DR was authorised to build a line from Herne Hill to Ludgate Hill, crossing the Thames at Blackfriars, and from Herne Hill to the LB&SCR and the West London Extension Railway and the LSWR. Further Acts in 1864 and 1866 ratified changes of plan, but the friendly relations culminated in a formal agreement between the LSWR and the LC&DR dated 5 January 1865.There were signs that the LC&DR was concerned that it had over-reached itself financially, and that it was glad of the capital injection that the LSWR (and incidentally the Great Northern Railway) provided. Mitchell and Smith say that "The LSWR lent the impoverished LC&DR substantial sums to complete their line". An arrangement for sharing ticket income in a way acceptable to both sides was incorporated.
The LC&DR had already opened its line from Victoria to Bromley, but it now opened its Ludgate Hill line striking north from Loughborough Junction, and a line from the Victoria line at the present-day Factory Junction to the LSWR at Clapham Junction. From 3 April 1866 LSWR trains ran from Kingston via Richmond or Hounslow via Kew, and then Barnes, Clapham Junction, Wandsworth Road, and stations via Loughborough Road to Ludgate Hill.R A Williams, The London and South Western Railway,  Volume 2: Growth and Consolidation, David & Charles, Newton Abbot, 1973, ISBN 0 7153 5940 1Adrian Gray, The London, Chatham & Dover Railway, Meresborough Books, Rainham, 1984, ISBN 0-905270-88-6

===Kensington and Richmond===

thumb|Kew River Bridge under constructionIn the 1860s, numerous new schemes were promoted for railways to reach Richmond, and the LSWR and the N&SWJR were alarmed that their primacy in the district would vanish. After much wrangling, the LSWR obtained an Act on 14 July 1864 for a line from the north end of Kensington through Hammersmith to Richmond. The West London Extension Railway had opened in 1863, connecting to the LSWR at Clapham Junction, facing Richmond. The LSWR had subscribed one-sixth of the capital cost of the new line, which was operated as a joint line. In 1863 the east facing spur to West London Junction opened, giving direct access from Waterloo to Kensington. Kensington station had been slightly relocated, considerably expanded, and renamed Kensington (Addison Road). As a minority partner in the West London Extension Railway, the LSWR's right to run north of Kensington, even for a few hundred yards, was contentious. This Bill had been hastily prepared and further Acts were obtained in 1865, 1866 and 1867 making a number of improvements.
The LSWR's new route opened on 1 January 1869; it was from Richmond Junction north of Kensington, turning south through its own Shepherds Bush and Hammersmith (Grove Road) stations, and it then turned west along the alignment that is now the District line from Ravenscourt Park to Turnham Green, then turning south-west through Brentford Road station (now called Gunnersbury), crossing the Thames to Richmond. A short spur was also opened from Acton Jn (later South Acton Jn) on the North and South Western Junction Railway to a junction at Brentford Road, giving the NLR direct access to Richmond. The main line ran to a terminus at Richmond, adjacent to the LSWR through station; this seems to have been done to prevent the North London Railway (NLR) from getting running powers to continue westward  over the LSWR.
The LSWR allocated six of Beattie's 2-4-0WT locomotives to the new service.Vic Mitchell and Keith Smith, West London Line: Clapham Junction to Willesden Junction, Middleton Press, Midhurst, 1996, ISBN 1 873 793 84 7
This access removed the requirement to accept trains from the N&SWJR via Kew and the Barnes curve, and the latter was later removed. A new spur was opened from south of Brentford Road to the LSWR Brentford line, referred to as The Chiswick Curve and also a connection was made at Hammersmith with the Hammersmith & City Railway; these probably opened on 1 June 1870.
The LSWR now ran trains from Waterloo to Richmond via Kensington (Addison Road) and Hammersmith, and also from Ludgate Hill to Richmond.
All of this activity was a form of damage limitation to minimise other railways' access to Richmond and places south and west of there. Nonetheless as well as the North London trains from Broad Street in the City of London, there were soon (from 1 June 1870) Great Western Railway trains arriving from Bishops Bridge Road via the Hammersmith & City Railway. In 1875 the Metropolitan District Railway made a short connection westward from its Hammersmith station to the LSWR at Studland Road Junction enabling its trains to reach Richmond. (This forms the present-day Hammersmith to Richmond  section of the District Line.) Trains started running on 1 June 1877.
In 1868 the Midland Railway had made a connection between Cricklewood and the N&SWJR, and it had been contemplating a purchase of the N&SWJR. To deflect from southward ambitions, the LSWR built a north-to-east curve (the Acton Curve) from Bollo Lane Junction to Acton Lane Junction, giving access to trains approaching from Willesden or Cricklewood eastwards to Hammersmith and Kensington. Midland coal trains started using this to Kensington (High Street) from 4 March 1878, and also for a time ran passenger trains to Richmond from Moorgate Street via Cricklewood.

===Kingston===

thumb|Kingston station at its opening in 1863The town of Kingston had had its station on the main line from the outset, but now the LSWR obtained powers to reach the town itself, but from the north. The line was authorised on 6 August 1860, leaving the existing network at Twickenham in a westward arc, and approaching Kingston from the west. There was pressure to terminate the line on the west side of the River Thames, at Hampton Wick. This would have required passengers arriving at that station to pay the halfpenny toll to cross the river bridge on foot to Kingston. The LSWR already had a "Kingston" station that was incoveniently located some distance from the town, and did not want another. They insisted on continuing the line across the river to Kingston itself. However the Lords Committee had inserted a clause requiring them to make and maintain a Hampton Wick station as well. The line opened on 1 July 1863, with stations at Teddington, Hampton Wick and New Kingston. As well as LSWR trains, the North London Railway operated passenger trains to Kingston under an obligation put on the LSWR in an earlier Act.Williams, page 180

===Tooting and Ludgate Hill===

In 1855 the Wimbledon and Croydon Railway had opened between those placesCarter says it was originally intended to reach Epsom via Mitcham, and the railway was absorbed by the LB&SCR in 1858. At Wimbledon the line curved in from the south-east and ran to a separate station north-east of Wimbledon Bridge. The LSWR passenger station was south-west of the bridge, and the W&C line had a separate spur connecting to the LSWR south-west of the station.
In 1864 the Tooting, Merton and Wimbledon Railway got its Act for a line from Streatham Junction to Wimbledon, including two routes from Tooting to Wimbledon forming a loop, the western part of which joined the Wimbledon and Croydon Railway at Merton.Williams, volume 2, says that the scope was from a junction with the LC&DR at Camberwell, but this seems to be a mistake.Christopher Awdry, Encyclopaedia of British Railway Companies, Patrick Stephens Ltd, Sparkford, 1990, ISBN 1-8526-0049-7
By the Tooting, Merton and Wimbledon Extension Railway Act of 5 July 1865, the powers of the original company were taken over by the LSWR and LB&SCR jointly. The LB&SCR granted running powers to the LSWR to London and also Crystal Palace, and over the Merton to Wimbledon section of the W&C line. They also agreed running arrangements for goods traffic to Deptford Wharf. At this time the LC&DR opened a spur from Herne Hill to Knights Hill (later Tulse Hill); oddly, they seem to have been alarmed that the LB&SCR granted the running powers to the LSWR to pass through Knights Hill.John Henry Fawcett, A Treatise on the Court of Referees in Parliament, published by Horace Cox, London, 1866
The Tooting, Merton and Wimbledon lines opened to LB&SCR trains in October 1868 and to LSWR trains on 1 January 1869. The LSWR could now run to Ludgate Hill from Wimbledon via Tooting, Streatham and Herne Hill.
On the line from Streatham Junction, the stations were Tooting Junction, located in the vee of the junction, followed by Haydons Lane (renamed Haydons Road on 1 October 1889).R V J Butt, The Directory of Railway Stations, Patrick Stephens Limited, Sparkford, 1995, ISBN 1 85260 508 1 Butt gives the first spelling as Haydens Lane, but Ordnance Survey maps from before the line was opened and afterwards all spell Haydon with an "o".Vic Mitchell and Keith Smith, London Suburban Railways—Lines Around Wimbledon, Middleton Press, Midhurst, 1996, ISBN 1 873793 75 8
The TM&W station at Wimbledon was north-east of Wimbledon Bridge, while the LSWR main line station was south-west of it. The earlier spur from the W&C line to the LSWR was now unnecessary (as the TM&W made its own connections) and was abandoned.
On the southern arm of the route from Tooting Junction to Wimbledon, there was an intermediate station at Merton Abbey, followed by a station at Lower Merton at the point of convergence with the Wimbledon and Croydon line. At first the platforms were only on the Tooting line. The TM&W line was double track, but the W&C line was single at the time, being doubled between Lower Merton and Wimbledon in 1868. A platform on the Croydon line was provided from 1 November 1870, and the station name was changed to Merton Park on 1 September 1887.

===Shepperton===

In 1861 promoters had agreed on the desirability of connecting the Thames Valley towns from Isleworth through Richmond, Hampton and Shepperton, to the main line railways: the Great Western Railway (GWR) and the LSWR and also the Metropolitan Railway. They formed the Metropolitan and Thames Valley Railway (M&TVR), and planned to make a railway for passengers and goods connecting to the metropolis, as well as to Chertsey for westward connection, and they contemplated mixed gauge. This hugely ambitious scheme needed a friendly sponsor, but the GWR was ungenerous, and the LSWR, desperate to keep the broad gauge rails out of its territory, agreed working arrangements, while the M&TVR reduced its ambition to simply building a branch from the LSWR Kingston line to Shepperton. Altering its name to the more realistic Thames Valley Railway (TVR), it obtained an authorising Act on 17 July 1862.
Many original supporters were disappointed at the limited scope of the proposal and withdrew, but the line opened as a single line on 1 November 1864, from Thames Valley Junction (now Strawberry Hill Junction). The line was now effectively a branch of the LSWR and amalgamation was formalised, effective from 1 January 1867. Doubling from the junction to Fulwell was probably completed in the same year, and in stages the whole line was doubled by 9 December 1878.Williams, volume 2, chapter 1

===Chertsey again===

Residents of Chertsey had long complained about their station, which was a terminus on a branch from Weybridge. On 23 June 1864 powers were included in the LSWR's Act to build a line from Virginia Water to Chertsey connecting end-on with the existing branch, and to re-site the terminus station there to a location north of Guildford Road level crossing. Virginia Water was on the independent Staines, Wokingham and Woking Junction Railway, worked by the LSWR. There was a south-to-west spur forming a triangle there. The line opened on 1 October 1866; it was double track except for the westward spur at Virginia Water.Williams, volume 2 chapter 2

===Leatherhead===

The original Leatherhead station on the Epsom & Leatherhead Joint line was described as temporary, and was inconveniently far north of the town, north-east of Kingston Road. In 1863 the LB&SCR promoted a Bill to extend to Dorking, with a new station in Leatherhead itself. The LSWR requested that the extension and station should be joint like the E&LR line, but the LBSCR were unwilling. A compromise was reached in which land would be purchased, sufficient for both companies to have stations alongside one another; the LB&SCR station was to be aligned towards Dorking, and the LSWR station towards a possible later extension to Guildford. The LSWR part of this arrangement was authorised by Act of 25 July 1864 and the new stations and double track throughout the E&LR, opened on 4 March 1867.

===Kingston to Malden===

thumb|Kingston-upon-Thames station about 1905The LSWR Kingston branch approached from the north in a wide circle; now in 1865 the company proposed to connect the town to the original main line at Wimbledon, crossing Richmond Road by a level crossing, and passing under the main line near the present New Malden, running eastwards alongside the main line to Wimbledon. An Act of 16 July 1866 modified the scheme, now authorising a high level through station at Kingston and crossing Richmond Road by a bridge. The line opened on 1 January 1869. It had a station at Norbiton, and at Malden it burrowed under the main line and ran to Wimbledon on the south side of the line, being joined by the Epsom branch at the present Raynes Park and the Tooting Merton and Wimbledon line immediately west of Wimbledon station. There seemFrom inspection of the 1:2,500 Ordnance Survey plans of the period to have been no connections between the double track for the branches and the main line at any point west of Wimbledon itself.Williams, volume 2, page 38

==After 1870==

In the decade ending in 1870, considerable infilling of the suburban network had taken place; many communities formerly feeling themselves to be inadequately served, now had their own station. Strategically the LSWR had preserved most of the territory it considered its own. The main losses were the entry of the N&SWJR and the North London Railway to Richmond, providing through trains to the City of London, and the penetration of the Metropolitan Railway and the Metropolitan District Railway in the area around Hammersmith. Both of these competitors exploited the LSWR's weakness in the location of Waterloo station, although this had been partly offset by the alliance with the LB&SCR and LC&DR, giving access to Ludgate Hill. Active further afield, the LSWR now moved on from expanding the suburban network, to improving what it already had. There remained one major challenge.

===Putney to Wimbledon===

As residential travel continued to increase, new and existing railways considered whether new territory, or a share of the business at places already served, could be exploited. At the same time, residents of some towns, particularly Kingston upon Thames, felt that they had an inferior service from the LSWR compared to rival towns like Richmond. The District Railway had opened as far as Fulham (Walham Green) in 1880 and was contemplating an extension from there to Guildford, striking through LSWR territory and serving many suburban towns that the LSWR considered its own, including Kingston. The LSWR managed to form an alliance with the District, under which a Kingston and London Railway would be constructed, from Surbiton via Kingston and Richmond to Putney, crossing the Thames and joining the District. Mutual running powers were to be agreed, giving the LSWR access to South Kensington and High Street Kensington.
Successive authorising Acts were obtained without construction taking place, until on 22 August 1881 the K&LR got its authorising Act to build from the District Railway at Putney Bridge, across the river and over Putney Heath and Wimbledon Common to the south side of the LSWR at Surbiton; the District Railway and the LSWR were authorised to acquire the K&LR jointly. In the same session the LSWR obtained powers to build a West End terminus adjacent to the District's South Kensington station. Also in that session, the Wimbledon and West Metropolitan Railway was authorised on 18 August 1882, to build a branch from the K&LR line at East Putney to join the TM&WR line at Haydons Road, getting access to Wimbledon station from there. The District Railway secured running powers over this line.
It now became obvious that the District Railway had not the money to fund its share of the K&LR construction, and after much wrangling, the LSWR agreed to take over the construction only of the section of the K&LR from Putney Bridge (District Railway) to East Putney, and a modified version of the W&WMR from there to Wimbledon station (instead of Haydons Road). There was also to be a flying junction at East Putney to the Richmond line towards Wandsworth. Keeping the invader away from Kingston was a great victory for the LSWR, but they had to build the Thames river bridge at Putney themselves. They never ran a revenue-earning train over the bridge, deciding to abandon the plans for their independent South Kensington station.
On 3 June 1889 District Railway trains started operation, using a separate two-platform station on the north side of the LSWR station at Wimbledon. On 1 July 1889 the spurs to the Wandsworth line at East Putney were opened, and the LSWR started operating passenger trains from Waterloo to Wimbledon, running to the LSWR main station there.Alan A Jackson, London's Local Railways, David & Charles, Newton Abbot, 1978, ISBN 0 7153 7479 6

===Windsor to Woking===

The LSWR had leased the Staines, Wokingham and Woking Junction line from the outset, but found relations with the owning company difficult. At the same time Ascot was growing in importance, and a southward branch from there to Aldershot was being planned. By Act of 4 July 1878, the LSWR purchased the company.
The LSWR obtained authorisation on 20 August 1883 to build a west curve at Staines, allowing through running from Windsor towards Virginia Water. This opened on 1 July 1884, and at the same time a new station, Staines High Street, was opened, as trains using the new curve would by-pass the existing Staines station. The same Act authorised a west curve at Byfleet, enabling direct running from Chertsey towards Woking, and this opened on 10 August 1885, although it appears not to have had a regular train service until 4 July 1887.

===Main line widenings===

For some years after the opening of the main line, little attention could be given to developing the new network and extensions and additions were made incrementally, with little attempt at proper integration. The ramshackle state of the Waterloo terminal was testimony to this, but the growth of traffic poses major challenges in operating the main line .
As goods business had developed at Nine Elms, the chief goods terminal for London, extensive yards had been built on both sides of the main line. In addition the locomotive workshops was located on the south side. In the mid-1870s the opportunity was taken to concentrate all the goods activity on the north side, diverting the running lines southwards on a new viaduct between the Wandsworth Road underbridge and New Road (now Thessaly Road) to make the space. As this occupied part of the locomotive works and running sheds, the opportunity was The four track main line was diverted progressively, tracks opening between 22 October 1877 and 21 July 1878. Corresponding widenings at Clapham Junction gave four tracks there to Queens Road (Battersea) on 1 November 1877.
Since the opening of the Epsom line there had been four tracks between Wimbledon and the present-day Raynes Park, extended to Malden when the Kingston line opened; but they were arranged as two double track railways, the main line and the branches running parallel. At Malden both tracks for the branch went under the main line to progress north-westwards.
A double-line junction at the west end of Coombe & Malden station (i.e. New Malden) was passed by the Board of Trade on 24 April 1880, enabling the four tracks to act as a four-track line rather than two isolated double tracks. Quadrupling throughout between Clapham Junction and Hampton Court Junction was progressively completed by 1 April 1884, with the tracks paired by direction (Up Local, Up Through, Down Through, Down Local.It is not certain that this naming convention was applied at this date) A new spur was provided at Malden to enable Up Kingston trains to run up to the Up Local Line, and a new underbridge at Raynes Park brought the Up Epsom line under the main line to join the Up Local Line, forming a burrowing junction at both places.
As part of this work a new combined and extended Wimbledon station north-east of Wimbledon Bridge was opened, on 21 November 1881, giving accommodation also to the Metropolitan District Railway's trains via Putney in separate platforms.
By 1890 the section Malden to Hampton Court Junction was quadrupled, and a third track (a second up line) was installed between Woking and Hampton Court Junction.

===A New Line to Guildford===

Residents of Cobham had long exerted pressure for connection to the rail network, and a number of schemes were put forward, and failed. After a complex of schemes, Acts in 1881, 1882 and 1883 authorised what became the Guildford New Line, running from Hampton Court Junction via Cobham, with a branch from the Leatherhead terminus joining it at Effingham, although there was no station there until 2 July 1888. Although the line was planned to serve local stations only, it gradually received through Portsmouth trains in the final years of the nineteenth century.

===Junctions near Twickenham===

The Shepperton branch had been served from the north at Thames Valley Junction, so that direct running from Kingston was not possible. This was rectified when the  south curve from Shacklegate Junction to Fulwell Junction was opened on 1 July 1894,Williams volume 2, page 43 though advertised passenger operation did not start until 1 June 1901.Faulkner and Williams, page 41
Twickenham flyover, leading the up line from Shepperton over the Ascot line was opened on 22 October 1883. This was the first grade-separated junction on the LSWR.

===Tooting lines===

Tooting station was resited east of London Road on 12 August 1894.

==Waterloo & City Railway==

thumb|An early engraving of a Waterloo and City Railway trainAfter a couple of fanciful independent schemes, the Waterloo & City Railway was promoted, obtaining an Act for its construction in 1893. Independent, but supported by the LSWR, it was to be a tube railway, that is, constructed by boring and using cast iron segments to line the tunnel. Using compressed air and the Greathead tunnelling shield, the line was constructed in twin tubes, passing under the River Thames and terminating at the Mansion House, in a common station provided by the Central London Railway. The station was also used by the City and South London Railway.
The line used electric traction at 500 v d.c. with a central live rail, and had only two stations: Waterloo, and City (later renamed Bank). It opened to the public on 8 August 1898. Through tickets and season tickets from LSWR surface stations were available. The LSWR operated it, and later absorbed it.J C Gillham, The Waterloo & City Railway, Oakwood Press, Usk, 2001, ISBN 0-85361-525-X

==The twentieth century==

If the closing years of the nineteenth century had seen a relaxation of the battle to secure territory and fend off competing lines, two new threats now arose: electric passenger trains and street tramways. As well as the developments that were actually implemented (see below) the Metropolitan Railway and the Central London Railway both developed schemes in the years running up to 1914 for extensions of traffic, or new routes, into LSWR territory.
Loss of traffic to street tramways was increasingly felt at the turn of the century, due to their convenience, frequency and cheap fares. Coupled with competition from the District and LNW Railways, this led to loss of traffic and loss-making operation on the more indirect LSWR routes; the Richmond service via Kensington and Hammersmith, and the Ludgate Hill service via Streatham were severely hit.

===Tube lines===

The City and South London Railway had been the first deep-level tube railway in the worldChristian Wolmar, The Subterranean Railway: How the London Underground Was Built and How It Changed the City Forever, Atlantic Books, 2004, ISBN 1-84354-023-1. when it opened in 1890, closely followed by the Central London Railway and the Waterloo and City Railway. A minor tube railway mania followed, threatening LSWR territory, but in fact the authorised schemes were complimentary rather than competing: the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway provided better access from Waterloo to the West End of London. However they demonstrated that electric haulage was superior to steam haulage in enabling a clean air environment at stations and in the trains, as well as technical benefits of increased acceleration and cheaper running.

===District Railway===

At the outset of the twentieth century, the Metropolitan District Railway (MDR) was planning to run electric trains to Wimbledon from Putney Bridge, extending its existing service. With LSWR co-operation the four-rail electrification was installed and District electric trains starting running to the north station at Wimbledon (the terminal platforms) on 27 August 1905. The line voltage was 600 v d.c.
This led to a proposal for the MDR to extend from Wimbledon to Sutton, and to quadruple the Putney to Wimbledon section which was already suffering from congestion. The idea was eventually dropped, but intermediate block posts were provided between Putney and Wimbledon to reduce section time and increase capacity.
The MDR also ran over the  LSWR line between Studland Road Junction (a little west of Hammersmith on the present-day District Line) and Turnham Green. This too was electrified, with the MDR Ealing service running as electric trains from 1 July 1905, and the Richmond service on 1 August 1905. The considerably enhanced and frequent train service operated by the MDR led them to propose quadrupling the track on this section. This was agreed and it opened for operation on 3 December 1911, with a burrowing junction at Turnham Green for Up District trains; the gradient was steep, at 1 in 50, and a flat junction was provided further east for Midland Railway coal trains that might not be able to climb that gradient.J N Faulkner and R A Williams, The LSWR in the Twentieth Century, David & Charles, Newton Abbot, 1988, ISBN 0 7153 8927 0

===LNWR electric trains===

From 1911 the London and North Western Railway (LNWR) proposed electrifying the North London Railway route, which it managed. It came to an arrangement with the LSWR whereby the latter's part of the routes to Richmond and Kew Bridge would be electrified for the LNWR trains (where they were not already electrified for the District Railway trains). The LNWR electric service started on 1 October 1916.

===Closure of the Studland Road, Tooting and Staines West curve services===

Declining traffic on the passenger trains via Kensington and Richmond via Studland Road Junction, and wartime stringency, led to their discontinuation from 5 June 1916; they had already been cut back to start from Clapham Junction instead of Waterloo. The LSWR track between Studland Road Junction and Turnham Green was transferred to the Underground group for the extension of the Piccadilly Line in 1932.Faulkner and Williams, page 40
Similarly the Wimbledon - Tooting - Herne Hill - Ludgate Hill service was discontinued from 1 January 1917, and the LB&SCR local trains from Wimbledon to Streatham were also curtailed, leaving that route section with no passenger service. However the LSWR was restored after the war, on 27 August 1923 (after the Grouping of the Railways, in which the LSWR became part of the Southern Railway).
The Windsor to Woking service via Staines West Curve was withdrawn on 31 January 1916, and Staines High Street, not served by the direct London to Windsor trains, was demolished.

===Hampton Court Junction and quadrupling===

In the late 1880s, Hampton Court was a flat junction, serving three tracks from Woking (two up lines and one down) and four tracks from there to Waterloo, as well as the Hampton Court branch and the Guildford New Line via Cobham. Powers were taken (20 July 1906) to provide a grade-separated junction. The Up Cobham line was brought under the main line, and opened on 21 October 1908, but the more expensive flyover for the Hampton Court branch, ascending on viaduct from Surbiton station, was not opened until 4 July 1915.

==Electrification of the LSWR network==

thumb|Map of LSWR electrified routes in 1922The LSWR had been slower than competing lines to consider electric traction seriously,discounting the special case of the Waterloo & City Railway and it was the LB&SCR among the railways south of London that electrified some of its suburban lines, with the first opening on 1 December 1909. Street tramways and competing, electric railways, coupled with demographic factors, led to losses of income year on year which were becoming serious, such that London area fares were reduced from 1 January 1914 to try to stem the loss.
The passive attitude of the LSWR toward the situation came to an end when Herbert Ashcombe Walker was appointed to the post of General Manager from 1 January 1912. Realising that electrification was essential to recover the Company's situation, he promoted Herbert Jones to the post of the company's Electrical Engineer. He sent Jones to New York to look particularly at direct current third-rail installations in use on urban railroads there.The LB&SCR system used a higher voltage and overhead line current collection; this required considerable expenditure on structures to support the overhead equipment.David Brown, Southern Electric, volume 1, Capital Transport, St Leonards, 2009, ISBN 978-1-854-143303
Jones and Walker reported to the Board on 6 December 1912, and the Board approved the largest electrification scheme thus far authorised by any railway. The routes to be converted to electric operation were all suburban or "outer suburban" and would be dealt with in two stages: the first stage would cover:
The purpose of the Claygate extension (on the Guildford New Line) was to enable train reversal and interchange to take place clear of the busy main line.
The LSWR proceeded without seeking Parliamentary authority, on the basis that the original London & Southampton Railway Act did not limit the choice of traction mode.
The Company opted to build its own power generating station, at Durnsford Road, a little east of Wimbledon, and five 5,000 kW turbo-generators were installed, generating three-phase electricity at 11 kV 25 Hz. This was distributed by lineside cables to sub-stations at Waterloo, Clapham Junction, Raynes Park, Kingston, Twickenham, Barnes, Isleworth, Sunbury and Hampton Court Junction; the sub-stations transformed the 11 kV down to the line voltage of 600 v and converted it to d.c. using rotary converters, which required to be manned continuously while trains were running.
On the track, a third rail of high conductivity steel was laid outside the four-foot; the return current travelled through the running rails; impedance bonds were provided at track circuit joints, and the track circuits had to be altered to a.c. operation.
The line voltage was 600 v positive d.c. nominal; where the North London Railway and District Railway trains ran over LSWR tracks they used a four rail system, with the outer rail at +300 v and the centre return rail at -300 v; this had to be altered to conform to the LSWR standard, and some alterations were required to the trains of the penetrating companies.
As part of the work, the route between Vauxhall and Nine Elms was widened to eight tracks, and the flyover at Hampton Court Junction, proposed earlier, was now constructed, with the Down Hampton Court trains climbing on viaduct from the platform at Surbiton. This was open for traffic on 4 July 1915.
The rolling stock consisted of 84 three-car units, all the coaches being converted from steam stock. The accommodation was in compartments, and second class accommodation was not provided.

===Electric operation starts===

The first route to commence electric operation was the Point Pleasant Jn to Wimbledon line on 25 October 1915; the Kingston Loop and the Shepperton branch followed on 30 January 1916, the Hounslow loop on 12 March, the Hampton Court branch on 18 June and Hampton Court Jn to Claygate on 20 November 1916.J Spencer Gilks, Railway Development at Kingston-upon-Thames — 2, in the Railway Magazine, August 1958
The trains operated on a regular interval timetable, and at first the same frequency continued through the peaks, with the train formations being strengthened at those times. The new electric service was a considerable success, and there was some overcrowding. The Guildford new line was served by push-and-pull trains connecting with the electric trains at Claygate, but to release electric stock to strengthen trains in the core electric area, the Claygate service was discontinued (and reverted to steam operation) to release some electric stock. This was done in July 1919, and the Claygate line did not receive regular electric trains until the entire Guildford New Line was electrified in 1925.
From 1919 additional capacity was created by converting further steam stock to two-car trailer units, to operate between two ordinary three-car units, forming an eight-car train. It had been found that the three-car units had power to spare. The trailer units had no driving compartment.
The First World War and the industrial shortage immediately following it had prevented progress with the second stage of electrification, covering the outer suburban lines; this would have included a grade-separated junction at Woking, but this was deferred too (and never built). The stage 1 network described above was therefore the full extent of LSWR electrification by the time of the Grouping of the railways under the Railways Act 1921, by which the Southern Railway was created from the LSWR, the LB&SCR, the South Eastern and Chatham Railway (SE&CR), and some minor lines; this took effect by 1 July 1923.Planned for 1 January 1923, legal difficulties delayed the formal implementation until July.
The Grouping was of course known about some considerable time before its implementation—for a time, nationalisation had seemed a possibility—but this did not deter adversarial attitudes being adopted by the three main constituents of the future Southern Railway, and this extended to electrification schemes. The LB&SCR were anxious that their 6.7 kV overhead system should be adopted as the standard, and at this time the SE&CR had been planning electrification of its system on a 3 kV overhead system.

===Rolling stock: electric units===

The initial batch of LSWR electric vehicles consisted of eight-four three-car units, all rebuilt from steam-hauled vehicles. These had been operating as "bogie-block" sets of four vehicles semi-permanently coupled, built at Eastleigh between 1902 and 1912. They were wooden-bodies with semi-elliptical roofs.
The conversion was carried out at Eastleigh works, and the electrical equipment, and much of the body and running gear conversion, was carried out by the British Westinghouse Electrical and Manufacturing Company there.
The formation was two motor coaches with a driving compartment and "brake" compartment at the outer ends, with a trailer between them. The outer bogie at each end of the unit was a motor bogie fitted with two axle-hungThe term was not yet in general use; it means that the electric motors were supported on brackets fixed to the driving axle rather than on the (sprung) bogie frame. traction motors rated at 275 hp (205 kW). A bus lineA bus line is a continuous electric connection that serves multiple sources and machines ran along the roof of the unit connecting all the current collector shoes, and if two units were coupled, the bus line connected the entire train.
The master controller had four positions, switching, full series, parallel, and full parallel, and control equipment shunted out starting resistances automatically as speed increased and current drawn fell. In practice drivers could move the controller to full parallel immediately on starting, and the control equipment would notch up without intervention. The notching process produced a series of sharp clicks, and the units were nicknamed "nutcrackers" from this cause. The specified maximum running speed was 52 mph (84 kph), although a maximum speed in service of 40 mph (64 kph) was imposed due to rough riding at higher speeds.
The Westinghouse quick-acting brake was installed in place of the automatic vacuum brake as it allowed faster stops and restarting, important for a high-frequency urban railway. Within the unit the couplings were semi-permanently fixed with a bar coupling, but conventional couplings were provided at unit ends; in addition there were the power jumper for the bus line and an eight-core control cable, as well as the Westinghouse brake pipe coupling.
For reasons of style, the units were given a blunt torpedo shaped end with a domed roof at the ends; a new livery was provided, of sage green, with black and yellow lining and mid-brown window mouldings, and the roof was coloured off-white. The width over body was 8 ft 0¾ in (2.46 m), and 8 ft 10¾ in (2.71 m) over handles. A central opal panel was provided at each end of the unit between the motorman's windows, and a stencil plate could be fitted to it, displaying a letter to indicate the route. The panel could be illuminated at night.
The units only provided first and third class accommodation.

===Trailer units===

The success of the new electric service was such that severe overcrowding took place at busy periods, and in 1919 the LSWR decided to build some two-car trailer units. The electric units had plenty of power and steam coaching vehicles were cheaply converted, so that eight-car trains could be formed by inserting one trailer between two three-car electric units. Shunting the trailer units off at the end of the busy periods was a difficult procedure as they did not have driving cabs, but they were a cheap and quick expedient to relieve the overcrowding. 24 of these units were built in the period January 1920 to December 1922.

==Southern Railway==

In 1923 the Southern Railway took over control of the LSWR and other railway companies in the south of England.
The LSWR suburban network was working well, and the Southern Railway continued and later extended the electrified system. The LSWR configuration of third rail operation at 600 v d.c. (later gradually increased to 750 d.c.) became the standard for the whole electrified network of the Southern Railway and later (after 1948) of the British Railways system in the southern counties, eventually reaching the coast at Ramsgate, Brighton, and Weymouth.

===Wimbledon development===

Wimbledon station was completely reconstructed in the years 1927-8, the multiple extensions including the joint LB&SCR section and the District Railway section being combined in an integrated structure, although still with identifiably distinct platforming arrangements.

===Durnsford Road flyover===

When the main line was quadrupled in the early years of the twentieth century, the tracks allocated to stopping trains were on the outside with the main lines in the centre; the configuration is called "pairing by direction". This had the disadvantage that local trains arriving at the Waterloo terminus had to cross all the main line traffic in and out, to reach the local lines platforms there. As part of a modernisation scheme, a flyover was built at Durnsford Road, east of Wimbledon, carrying the Up Local Line across both the Through (Main) lines, so that from there to Waterloo both the local lines were adjacent, on the south side of the Through Lines—the arrangement known as "paired by use". The new layout was brought into use on 17 May 1936.

==Chessington line==

After the LSWR ceased to exist, considerable housing development took place in the area that came to be served by the Chessington branch, built by the Southern Railway. It was originally planned to extend to Leatherhead, joining the existing route there.
It left the Raynes Park to Leatherhead line at Motspur Park and it was opened on 29 May 1938 to Tolworth, with an intermediate station at Malden Manor. The following year, on 28 May 1939, it was extended to Chessington North and Chessington South. The stations on the line were of concrete in an Art Deco style, typical of the Southern Railway's design style of the period.
Work to extend beyond Chessington to Leatherhead was interrupted by the Second World War, and never resumed afterwards.Vic Mitchell and Keith Smith, Wimbledon to Epsom, Middleton Press, Midhurst, 1995, ISBN 1 873 793 62 6

==Notes==

==References==


