[[Southfield School (Brookline, MA)]]

CATEGORIES: Private high schools in Massachusetts, Private elementary schools in Massachusetts, Private middle schools in Massachusetts, Schools in Norfolk County, Massachusetts

Southfield School is an independent school for girls located in Brookline, Massachusetts, USA. Founded in 1992, its campus is also home to its brother school, Dexter, an independent school for boys founded in 1926.

==Campus==

The 36-acre campus on the Boston-Brookline border provides a setting and facilities which serve the school community well. Of particular note is the Clay Center for Science and Technology which provides students with extraordinary classroom opportunities as well as a world-class astronomical observatory.

==Athletics==

Southfield's athletic programs feature a combination of intramural and interscholastic offerings. In Kindergarten through Grade 2 physical education is a daily activity. Intramural competition is introduced in Grade 3 through Grade 6 during which students compete in many different sports with the goal of instilling a spirit of sportsmanship and teamwork. Beginning in Grade 7, athletes choose from a variety of interscholastic sports. Southfield teams compete against many schools throughout the New England area. The school uses five fields on campus, including two multi-purpose turf fields and a dedicated baseball diamond. Two hockey rinks, the Lincoln Pool, and the Dalrymple Gymnasium provide indoor athletic facilities.  The rowing program has the benefit of a boathouse on the Charles River in Dedham, ten minutes from campus.  The school has won consecutive New England Championships in basketball.

==Girls==

Southfield girls are enthusiastic, smart, and happy to learn. They never miss a chance to be charitable. In fact Southfield alone, with only 330 girls raised over one thousand dollars for the Jimmy Fund. These girls are competitive but never sore losers. Southfield has strong academics and strong athletics. Girls became part of this school in 1992 and from that point forward they have always left their mark whether it is on the field or on an exam.

