[[Tirupullamangai]]

CATEGORIES: Padal Petra Stalam, Hindu temples in Thanjavur district

Tirupullamangai or Thirupullamangai is a Hindu temple dedicated to Lord Siva located in Pasupathikoil, Papanasam taluk of Thanjavur district, Tamil Nadu, India. The temple is incarnated by the hymns of Thevaram, the 7th century Tamil literature and is classified as Paadal Petra Sthalam.

==Brahmapurisvarar Temple==

This temple is one of the 7 shrines associated with Saptamartrikas(seven female deities in Siva temple).  The lord of this temple Shiva as Brahamapurisvarar is also known as Alandurai Mahadevar. The temple has been revered by the verses of Sundarar, one of the Nayanmars.
The shrine of Lord Siva faces east; the temple is entered through a small gopuram(entrance tower) on the eastern side of the enclosing wall.  Both of these, along with the hall, directly in front of the entrance, are of recent date, as are various subsidiary buildings on either sides of the gopuram and the goddess shrine in the north of the hall.  The original parivara (attendant deities) have disappeared.The Heritage of Indian Art:No.4. Brahmapuriswara Temple, Pullamangai.P.10.Douglas Barren & Madhuri Desat

==History==

The temple should have existed as a brick structure from 7th Century. The stone temple should have been built during the reign of Parantaka Chola I, which is evident from the inscriptions found in the temple. There are also inscriptions from the period of Sundara Chola,  Adiya Karikalan and Raja Raja Chola I. 
The garbhagriha(sanctum) and the arthamandapa(secluded hall) of the temple belong to the earlier structure, while there have been newer structures added to it lately. All the parivara(consort) shrines of the earlier period have not survived and few newer shrines have come up. 
The sculptures of this temple is highly acclaimed for its beauty. Apart from the lovely devakoshta(divine) images of Dakshinamurthy, Lingodhbhavar, Brahma and Durga,  the vimana(shrine) too houses exquisite images of Vishnu, Narashima, Tripurantaka. The temple has series of miniature panels depicting scenes from Ramayana. The sculpting in this temple is of high class and speaks volume of Chola artistry.Tourist Guide to Tamil Nadu.P.77

==Gallery==

File:Pullamangai Vaalivadham2.jpg|Valli is lying dead, shot by Rama. His wife Tara,son Angadha and brother Sugreeva grieve. The entire clan of monkeys express their grief on Valli's death. The panel is 6 inches X 6 inches - impressive miniature sculpture
File:Pullamangai brahma2.jpg|Brahma, Devakoshta image on the northern side of the temple

==References==


