[[Habibie & Ainun]]

CATEGORIES: 2012 films, Indonesian films, Indonesian-language films, German-language films, Films shot in Germany, Films shot in Indonesia

Habibie & Ainun is an Indonesian drama film which was released on 20 December 2012 starring Reza Rahardian, Bunga Citra Lestari and Tio Pakusadewo. At its launch, this film was watched by the 6th President of Republic of Indonesia Dr H Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono along with the16th Governor of Jakarta, Ir H Joko Widodo as well as the main character in the film , the 3rd President of the Republic of Indonesia, Bacharuddin Jusuf Habibie. This film is based on the memoir written by Habibie about his wife, Hasri Ainun Habibie, in his book " Habibie and Ainun"
The film Habibie & Ainun became the only Indonesian box office with the most number of audiences in the theaters till date in the Indonesia Film Industry, 4.7 million viewers.

==Synopsis==

This is a story about finding one's soul mate. A story about finding one's first love and last love. A story about Indonesia's third president and his wife. A story about Habibie and Ainun. Rudy Habibie is a genius in air planes and he had big dreams. He devoted his life to Indonesia by building an airplane in uniting Indonesia.
Meanwhile, Ainun is a young and clever doctor who had a wonderful career ahead of her. In the year 1962, two friends from the same high school before,  met again in Bandung. Habibie fell in love immediately with Ainun whom according to him was as sweet as sugar. But Ainun not only fell in love, she had faith and confidence in his vision and dream. They married and moved to Germany. Having a dream with the intention of it becoming a reality is never easy. They both knew that. Their love grew stronger in the journey of realizing their dreams. The cold climate of Germany, the sacrifices, the pain, the loneliness and the temptation of wealth and power when they returned to Indonesia entwined their lives as one. To Habibie, Ainun is everything. She is the apple of his eye. To Ainun, Habibie means everything. He is the love of her life. However, all stories have endings, every dream has its limitations. And at one point, the soul mates realize; will their love continue to be eternal?

==Cast==

==External links==


