[[Ferenc Szombathelyi]]

CATEGORIES: 1887 births, 1946 deaths, People from Győr, Hungarian soldiers, Austro-Hungarian military personnel of World War I, Austro-Hungarian Army officers, Hungarian military personnel of World War II, Hungarian people executed by hanging, People executed by Yugoslavia by hanging

Ferenc Szombathelyi (né Knausz or Knauz; 17 May 1887 - 4 November 1946) was a Hungarian military officer who served as Chief of Army Staff during World War II.

==Military career==

Szombathelyi joined the Austro-Hungarian army as a cadet in 1902 and was subsequently promoted to lieutenant in 1907 in the 16th Infantry Regiment. From 1911 he studied at the Kriegsschule (military academy) in Vienna. After participating in World War I he joined the newly founded Royal Hungarian Army. From 1926 he taught at the Ludovica Military Academy in Budapest. From 1931 to 1933 he was Chief of Staff of the 3rd Mixed Brigade, after which he served as adjutant of the high command of the armed forces in 1935–36. In 1938 he became the commander of the Ludovica Military Academy. From 1934 he used the surname of his mother instead of his German name.
In 1938–39 he held the post of Deputy Chief of Staff. From 1939-41 he commanded the VIII Corps before he was appointed commanding general of the "Carpathian group" (Kárpát Csoport), with which he took part in Operation Barbarossa. On 6 September he was appointed by Regent Miklós Horthy to succeed the pro-German Henrik Werth as Chief of General Staff. Szombathelyi assessed the prospects of war with the Soviet Union sceptically and did not hesitate to share this view with his German counterpart. Shortly after his appointment he was present at a meeting between Hitler and Horthy when the latter promised to provide more troops. He successfully delayed this measure until it could no longer be avoided after the setbacks of the German army in the winter of 1941/42 and the increased commitment of Romania. In April 1942 he sent the Second Army of Gusztáv Jány to the Eastern Front. Previously, in response to alleged attacks by communist partisans and Chetniks in the annexed Batschka, he ordered a military intervention by General Ferenc Feketehalmy-Czeydner, which evolved into punitive action against Serb-inhabited villages and culminated in the massacre of Novi Sad.
In response to the catastrophic defeats of the second Army in the winter of 1942/43, Hungary increasingly tried to distance itself from its Axis partners. Szombathelyi's proposal to use Hungarian divisions to occupy the Balkans as a substitute for the failure of the second Army was welcomed by Hitler but rejected by Prime Minister Miklós Kállay. Contacts with the Western powers were initiated, with Kállay and Szombathelyi playing leading roles. After the German invasion of Hungary in March 1944, Szombathelyi was removed from office and placed under house arrest at German insistence. He was arrested in October 1944 after the Arrow Cross Party assumed power. Szombathelyi was deported to Germany toward the end of the war, then taken into custody by the Americans, who, however, turned him over to Hungary shortly thereafter. He was convicted by the Hungarian people's court to life imprisonment, then extradited to Yugoslavia. Finally, November 4, 1946, in town of Petrovaradin (hun. Pétervárad) in Voivodina, gen. Szombathelyi was executed through impalement. Details of Szombathelyi's execution was revealed in 1991 by hungarian writer Tibor Cseres in his book "Vengeance in Baczka". The Hungarian sentence against Szombathelyi was posthumously cancelled in 1994.

==References==


