[[Future Home Building]]

CATEGORIES: 1960s American television series

Future Home Building was a television show in the early 1960s. The show was a Public-access television show that was a DIY guide for home improvement. The home improvements in the show were based on the "futuristic" aesthetic trend in the 1960s.
The show was a mere 8 episodes, but is remembered as being the original DIY home improvement show. It was broadcast out of Georgia and was produced by Johnny Nixon, from Birmingham, AL and hosted by Bobby Villa from Fort Payne, AL. There was certain scandal caused by the sixth episode in which the unedited version was "accidentally" aired instead the final copy of the episode. The scene showed Bobby Villa in the heat of an argument with his right hand man and former business partner Jorge Ramirez. Villa accused Ramirez of trying to impede his success and repeatedly stated that Ramirez was going to sabotage his television career. Things got even more heated when Villa referred to Ramirez as "Bean Burrito" for the duration of the episode.
During the episodes following the "Bean Burrito" incident, Villa and Ramirez began to escalate the name calling and hostility. The words exchanged began as simple spiteful insults and eventually episodes were filled with racial slurs and profanity during the heated arguments. Public outrage began to mount as the episodes went on television profane and unedited. When interviewed by the local news team of WAGA-TV - Fox 5 Atlanta, Nixon (the producer also tasked with editing at the time) divulged that he had left the shows unedited on purpose. He was quoted as saying, "...Bob wanted out of his contract after an incident with Jorge, but we were required to shoot and air an entire 12 episode season. I owed Bob around $5,000 that I had spent on designer hallucinogenic drugs, and he told me that getting the show taken off the air would pay the debt back. So I thought that airing their arguments with all the swear words was the quickest way to get it taken down." Nixon is currently living in Birmingham, AL and working with John Grisham on his account of the story tentitively titled: "The N-Word, LSD, and 8 Other Ways to Not Build a House on Public Access Television".

