[[The Krishna legend in Kathak]]

CATEGORIES: Krishna

Krishna is one of the main characters portrayed in the Kathak dance, along with Radha, Durga, Shiva, Ganesh, etc. Krishna's merry dancing is a popular theme in Kathak.Lucknow gharana kathak dance

==History==

Kathak has been closely associated with Krishna's legend since its initial phase of development.  The earliest mention of Kathak as an art form is found in the Arjuna-Vanavasa chapter of the Aadi-Parva of Mahabharata.  In its initial phase, Kathak was most likely a mimetic representation of Puranic literature accompanied with dance passages. According to Kaiyata of the 10th century AD, Kathakas were Granthikas reciting stories related to Vishnu. Naturally when Krishna was identified with Vishnu, Granthikas began narrating Krishna-based stories. During this time, a rich musical theatre form had evidently grown out of the rich Krishna theatre tradition of Mathura region. Thus, it can be reasonably assumed that ‘Katha-Vachan’, the earliest form of Kathak was exclusively based on Krishna’s legend.

==Krishna Bhakti==

The bhakti centering around Krishna is of two forms –
The concept of madhura bhakti where Lord is the ‘Supreme lover’ gained popularity amongst the worshippers of  Krishna cult. Lord is in love with the soul and vice versa. This concept found very fertile land in the emotional make up of Vaishnavite literature. The most notable compositions are of the  ‘Ashtachhapkars’ – the eight poets. They were the followers of Vallabhacharya and Vithalnath and were named as Surdas, Kumbhandas, Nanddas, Parmananddas, Chaturbhujdas, Krishnadas, Govindswami and Chitswami. These poets produced a wealth of lyrical songs narrating the various episodes of Krishna’s life with special emphasis on madhura bhava.
Kathak dancers liberally use these songs in their recitals. Krishna’s childhood pranks, so lovingly depicted by Surdas were the epitome of Vatsalyarasa. Even while depicting shringar rasa – madhura bhava, Krishna legend is shown with many splendored hues and colours. The amorous dalliance of the symbolic lovers Krishna and Radha is the meeting of Jeevatma/self with Parmatma/GOD. The outpourings of these saint-poets form an integral part of a Kathak dancer’s repertoire.Massey, Reginald (2012). India's Kathak Dance - Past, Present, Future.

==Themes of Krishna==

In Kathak, the Krishna theme can be showcased in various formats. They are as follows –
It is said that when Krishna danced his divine dance on the hood of the defeated serpent Kaliya, various mnemonic sounds/bol emanated from Krishna’s feet like Ta, Thei, Tat, etc. which formed the building blocks of Kathak. Since Krishna is also known as ‘Natwar’, these bols came to be known as Natwari bols. Many eminent dancers of the recent past were of the firm opinion that Kathak dance revolving around the dancing of Lord Krishna should be named as Natwari. The art of storytelling or ‘katha-vachan’ should be called Kathak but the classical style that grew out of it should be named as Natwari.
Whether the style is called Kathak or Natwari, there is no doubt that it is deeply associated with Krishna legend since times immemorial.Kothari, Sunil (2001). Kathak: Indian Classical Dance Art. ISBN 8170172233.

==References==


