[[Ikan goreng]]

CATEGORIES: Indonesian cuisine, Malaysian cuisine, Fish dishes

Ikan goreng is a generic term that refers to various kinds of Indonesian and Malaysian dishes of deep fried fish or other forms of seafood. Ikan goreng literally means "friedfish" in Indonesian and Malay. 
Ikan goreng is very popular in Indonesia. Usually, the fish is marinated with mixture of spices pastes, some recipes uses kecap manis (sweet soy sauce) to coat the fish after being fried. Ikan goreng are usually deep fried in ample of extremely hot coconut oil well until the color turn golden and crisp. This method are usually done on carp, gourami and milkfish in order to turn the fine fishbone crumble, crisp and edible. 

==Spices==

Prior to frying, fishes are usually marinated with spices mixture, and sometimes kecap manis (sweet soy sauce). The spices mixture may vary among regions and places, but usually it consists of combination of salt, lemon juice, ground shallot, garlic, chili pepper, coriander, turmeric, galangal and salt. Some recipes may employ batter or egg coating on fish prior to frying. After being fried, commonly fish might be consumed right away with steamed rice and sambal terasi (chili with shrimp paste) or sambal kecap (slices of chili, shalot, and sweet soy sauce) as dipping sauce. The East Indonesian Manado and Maluku ikan goreng usually uses dabu-dabu or colo-colo condiment. 
Some recipes of ikan goreng might add additional bumbu (spice mixture) mixed with or poured on top of fried fish, such as bumbu acar kuning (yellow pickles), made of turmeric, garlic, and other spices paste with sliced cucumber, carrot, chili, and round shalots, or chopped tomato with vinegar. Another close recipes such as fish rica-rica and asam pedas.

==Variants==

There are many variants and recipes of ikan goreng, differ from the recipes of marinate spices, bumbu toppings, dipping sauces or sambals, to the species of fishes being fried. Almost all kind of fish and seafood can be made into ikan goreng, the most popular are freshwater gourami, bilis (mystacoleucus), patin (pangasius), nila (nile tilapia), mujair (mozambique tilapia) and ikan mas (carp). Seafood fried fishes are bandeng (milkfish), tongkol or cakalang (skipjack tuna), tuna, bawal (pomfret), tenggiri (wahoo), kuwe (trevally), baronang (rabbitfish), kerapu (garoupa), kakap merah (red snapper), teri (anchovy), todak (swordfish), hiu or cucut (shark) and pari (stingray).

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


