[[Necho II]]

CATEGORIES: 595 BC deaths, Pharaohs of the Twenty-sixth Dynasty of Egypt, Year of birth unknown, Exploration of Africa

Necho IIThomas Dobson. Encyclopædia: Or, A Dictionary of Arts, Sciences, and Miscellaneous Literature. Stone house, no. 41, South Second street, 1798. Page 785 (sometimes Nekau,A History of Egypt, from the XIXth to the XXXth Dynasties. By Sir William Matthew Flinders Petrie. p336. Neku,The Historians' History of the World: Prolegomena; Egypt, Mesopotamia. Edited by Henry Smith Williams. p183. Nechoh,United States Exploring Expedition: Volume 15. By Charles Wilkes, United States. Congress. p53 or Nikuu;The Bibliotheca Sacra, Volume 45. Dallas Theological Seminary., 1888. Greek: Νεχώς Β' or Νεχώ Β'Essay on the Hieroglyphic System of M. Champollion, Jun., and on the Advantages which it Offers to Sacred Criticism. By J. G. Honoré Greppo. p128Transliterated from Herodotus as "Necos") of KemetNew African. Issues 392-402. Page 20. 2001. was a king of the Twenty-sixth dynasty of Egypt (c. 610 BC – c. 595 BC).  Necho undertook a number of construction projects across his kingdom.The history of Egypt By Samuel Sharpe. E. Moxon, 1852. Part 640. p138. In his reign, according to the Greek historian Herodotus (4.42), Necho II reputedly sent out an expeditionThe history of Egypt By Samuel Sharpe. E. Moxon, 1852. Part 640. p18. of Phoenicians, which in three years sailed from the Red Sea around Africa to the mouth of the Nile.[ref]Herodotus, on this point, was in disbelief that the Phoenicians had the sun on their right hand all the time - in Herodotus's time it was not known that the sea extended south beyond the equator and around Africa.

For more discussion on this, see: The Penny Cyclopaedia of the Society for the Difussion of Useful Knowledge, Volume 1. Charles Knight, 1833. p172. 

Also see Necho_II's Phoenician_expedition below for various other views on this contentious topic.[/ref] His son, Psammetichus II, upon succession may have removed Necho's name from monuments.The Popular Handbook of Archaeology and the Bible. Edited by Norman L. Geisler, Joseph M. Holden. p287. 
Necho played a significant role in the histories of the Assyrian Empire, Babylonia and the Kingdom of Judah. Necho II is most likely the pharaoh mentioned in several books of the Bible.Encyclopædia britannica. Edited by Colin MacFarquhar, George Gleig. p785The Holy Bible, According to the Authorized Version (A.D. 1611). Edited by Frederic Charles Cook. p131see Hebrew Bible / Old Testament The second campaign's aim of Necho's campaigns was Asiatic conquest,The temple of Mut in Asher. By Margaret Benson, Janet A. Gourlay, Percy Edward Newberry. p276. (cf. Nekau's chief ambition lay in Asiatic conquest)Egypt Under the Pharaohs: A History Derived Entireley from the Monuments. By Heinrich Brugsch, Brodrick. p444 (cf. Neku then attempted to assert the Egyptian supremacy in Asia.) to contain the Westward advance of the Babylonian Empire, and cut off its trade route across the Euphrates. However, the Egyptians were defeated by the unexpected attack of the Babylonians and were eventually expelled from Syria. 
The Egyptologist Donald B. Redford observed that although Necho II was "a man of action from the start, and endowed with an imagination perhaps beyond that of his contemporaries, Necho had the misfortune to foster the impression of being a failure."Donald B. Redford, Egypt, Canaan, and Israel in Ancient Times, (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992), p. 447-48.

==Biography==

===Lineage and early life===

Necho II was the son of Psammetichus I by his Great Royal Wife Mehtenweskhet. His prenomen or royal name Wahem-Ib-Re means "Carrying out the Heart (i.e., Wish) of Re."Peter Clayton, Chronicle of the Pharaohs, Thames and Hudson, 1994. p.195  Upon his ascension, Necho was faced with the chaos created by the raids of the Cimmerians and the Scythians, who had not only ravaged Asia west of the Euphrates, but had also helped the Babylonians shatter the Assyrian Empire. That once mighty empire was now reduced to the troops, officials, and nobles who had gathered around a general holding out at Harran, who had taken the throne name of Ashur-uballit II. Necho attempted to assist this remnant immediately upon his coronation, but the force he sent proved to be too small, and the combined armies were forced to retreat west across the Euphrates.

===Military campaigns===

====First campaign====

In the spring of 609 BC, Necho personally led a sizable force to help the Assyrians. At the head of a large army, consisting mainly of his mercenaries, Necho took the coast route Via Maris into Syria, supported by his Mediterranean fleet along the shore, and proceeded through the low tracts of Philistia and Sharon. He prepared to cross the ridge of hills which shuts in on the south the great Jezreel Valley, but here he found his passage blocked by the Judean army. Their king, Josiah, sided with the Babylonians and attempted to block his advance at Megiddo, where a fierce battle was fought and Josiah was killed (2 Kings 23:29, 2 Chronicles 35:20-24).
Herodotus reports the campaign of the pharaoh in his Histories, Book 2:159:
[tpl]cquote|Necos, then, stopped work on the canal and turned to war; some of his triremes were constructed by the northern sea, and some in the Arabian Gulf, by the coast of the Sea of Erythrias. The windlasses for beaching the ships can still be seen. He deployed these ships as needed, while he also engaged in a pitched battle at Magdolos with the Syrians, and conquered them; and after this he took Cadytis (Kadesh), which is a great city of Syria. He sent the clothes he had worn in these battles to Branchidae of Miletus and dedicated them to Apollo.''[/tpl]
Necho soon captured Kadesh on the Orontes and moved forward, joining forces with Ashur-uballit and together they crossed the Euphrates and laid siege to Harran. Although Necho became the first pharaoh to cross the Euphrates since Thutmose III, he failed to capture Harran, and retreated back to northern Syria. At this point, Ashur-uballit vanished from history, and the Assyrian Empire was conquered by the Babylonians.

====Kings and Chronicles====

According to the Book of Jeremiah in the summer of c. 605 BC Carchemish was the site of an important battle which was fought by the Babylonian army of Nebuchadrezzar II and that of Pharaoh Necho II of Egypt.Jeremiah 46-48, biblegateway.com 
The Book of Kings states that Necho met King Josiah of the Kingdom of Judah at Megiddo and killed himThe Nile: Notes for Travellers in Egypt.  Sir Ernest Alfred Wallis Budge. p16 ([tpl]bibleverse|2|Kings|23:29|NIV[/tpl]) (see Battle of Megiddo (609 BC)). Leaving a sizable force behind, Necho returned to Egypt. On his return march, he found that the Judeans had selected Jehoahaz to succeed his father Josiah, whom Necho deposed and replaced with Jehoiakim.II. Chronicles  By Philip Chapman Barker. p447-448 He brought Jehoahaz back to Egypt as his prisoner, where Jehoahaz ended his days (2 Kings 23:31; 2 Chronicles 36:1-4).
The Book of Chronicles ([tpl]bibleverse|2|Chronicles|35:20-27|NIV[/tpl]) gives an account of his death. The passage states that, soon after Josiah had introduced his Passover reforms, Necho king of Egypt came up to fight against the Babylonians at Carchemish on the Euphrates River and that King Josiah was fatally wounded by an Egyptian archer.  He was then brought back to Jerusalem to die.  Necho is quoted as saying: 
 "What quarrel is there between you and me, O king of Judah? It is not you I am attacking at this time, but the house with which I am at war. God has told me to hurry; so stop opposing God, who is with me, or he will destroy you." (NIV) 

====Second campaign====

The Babylonian king was planning on reasserting his power in Syria. In 609 BC, King Nabopolassar captured Kumukh, which cut off the Egyptian army, then based at Carchemish. Necho responded the following year by retaking Kumukh after a four-month siege, and executed the Babylonian garrison. Nabopolassar gathered another army, which camped at Qurumati on the Euphrates.  However, Nabopolassar's poor health forced him to return to Babylon in 605 BC.  In response, in 606 BC the Egyptians attacked the leaderless Babylonians (probably then led by the crown prince Nebuchadrezzar) who fled their position. 
At this point, the aged Nabopolassar, passed command of the army to his son Nebuchadrezzar II, who led them to a decisive victory over the Egyptians at Carchemish, and pursued the fleeing survivors to Hamath. Necho's dream of restoring the Egyptian Empire in the Middle East as had occurred under the New Kingdom was destroyed as Nebuchadrezzar conquered Egyptian territory from the Euphrates to the Brook of Egypt (Jeremiah 46:2; 2 Kings 23:29) down to Judea. Although Nebuchadrezzar spent many years in his new conquests on continuous pacification campaigns, Necho was unable to recover any significant part of his lost territories.  For example, when Ashkalon rose in revolt, despite repeated pleas the Egyptians sent no help, and were barely able to repel a Babylonian attack on their eastern border in 601 BC. When he did repel the Babylonian attack, Necho managed to capture Gaza while pursuing the enemy. Necho turned his attention in his remaining years to forging relationships with new allies: the Carians, and further to the west, the Greeks.

===Ambitious projects===

At some point during his Syrian campaign, Necho II initiated but never completed the ambitious project of cutting a navigable canal from the Pelusiac branch of the Nile to the Red Sea. Necho's Canal was the earliest precursor of the Suez Canal.Redmount, Carol A. "The Wadi Tumilat and the "Canal of the Pharaohs"" Journal of Near Eastern Studies, Vol. 54, No. 2 (April , 1995), pp. 127-135 It was in connection with a new activity that Necho founded a new city of Per-Temu Tjeku which translates as 'The House of Atum of Tjeku' at the site now known as Tell el-Maskhuta,Shaw, Ian; and Nicholson, Paul. The Dictionary of Ancient Egypt. The British Museum Press, 1995. p.201 about 15 km west of Ismailia. The waterway was intended to facilitate trade between the Mediterranean Sea and the Indian Ocean.See also: History of the Suez Canal
Necho also formed an Egyptian navy by recruiting displaced Ionian Greeks. This was an unprecedented act by the pharaoh since most Egyptians had traditionally harboured an inherent distaste for and fear of the sea.Peter Clayton, Chronicle of the Pharaohs, Thames and Hudson, 1994, p.196 The navy which Necho created operated along both the Mediterranean and Red Sea coasts.Herodotus 2.158; Pliny N.H. 6.165ff; Diodorus Siculus 3.43 Necho II constructed warships,The Cambridge Ancient History. Edited by John Boardman, N. G. L. Hammond. p49 including questionably triremes.Carthage Must Be Destroyed: The Rise and Fall of an Ancient Civilization. By Richard Miles. Penguin, Jul 21, 2011. p1781

===Phoenician expedition===

At some point between 610 and before 594 BC, Necho reputedly commissioned an expedition of Phoenicians,Unlikely with the intent of circumnavigating Africa, but for finding an alternative route to Asia than through the area near the Levant. Also, such voyages were undertaken for trading with more southern African cities; thereafter being blown off-course, if not tasked to sail around the lands. who it is said in three years sailed from the Red Sea around Africa back to the mouth of the Nile.Israel, India, Persia, Phoenicia, Minor nations of western Asia. Edited by Henry Smith Williams. p118Anthony Tony Browder, Nile valley contributions to civilization,Volume 1. 1992 (cf. In the Twenty Fifth Dynasty, during the reign of Necho II, navigational technology had advanced to the point where sailors from Kemet successfully circumnavigated Africa and drew an extremely accurate map of the continent.) The belief in Herodotus' account,  handed down to him by oral tradition,M. J. Cary. The Ancient Explorers. Penguin Books, 1963. Page 114 is primarily because he stated with disbelief that the Phoenicians "as they sailed on a westerly course round the southern end of Libya (Africa), they had the sun on their right" - to northward of them (The Histories 4.42As for Libya, we know it to be washed on all sides by the sea, except where it is attached to Asia. This discovery was first made by Necos, the Egyptian king, who on desisting from the canal which he had begun between the Nile and the Arabian gulf, sent to sea a number of ships manned by Phoenicians, with orders to make for the Pillars of Hercules, and return to Egypt through them, and by the Mediterranean. The Phoenicians took their departure from Egypt by way of the Erythraean sea, and so sailed into the southern ocean. When autumn came, they went ashore, wherever they might happen to be, and having sown a tract of land with corn, waited until the grain was fit to cut. Having reaped it, they again set sail; and thus it came to pass that two whole years went by, and it was not till the third year that they doubled the Pillars of Hercules, and made good their voyage home. On their return, they declared- I for my part do not believe them, but perhaps others may- that in sailing round Libya they had the sun upon their right hand. In this way was the extent of Libya first discovered. [tpl]cite wikisource|chapter=Book 4|wslink=History of Herodotus|plaintitle=History of Herodotus|last=|first=|year=|publisher=|page=|wspage=|scan=[/tpl]) -- in Herodotus' time it was not generally known that Africa was surrounded by an ocean (with the southern part of Africa being thought connected to AsiaDie umsegelung Asiens und Europas auf der Vega. Volume 2. By Adolf Erik Nordenskiöld. p148); however, some Egyptologists dispute that an Egyptian Pharaoh would authorize such an expedition,For instance, the Egyptologist Alan Lloyd wrote "Given the context of Egyptian thought, economic life, and military interests, it is impossible for one to imagine what stimulus could have motivated Necho in such a scheme and if we cannot provide a reason which is sound within Egyptian terms of reference, then we have good reason to doubt the historicity of the entire episode."  Alan B. Lloyd, "Necho and the Red Sea: Some Considerations", Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, 63 (1977) p.149. except for the reasons of Asiatic conquestTwentieth Century. Twentieth century, 1908. p816The Historians' History of the World. Edited by Henry Smith Williams. p286 (cf. Syria seems to have submitted to him, as far as the countries bordering the Euphrates. Gaza offered resistance, but was taken. But it was only for a short time that Neku II could feel himself a conqueror.) and trade in the ancient maritime routes.Cosmos: A Sketch of a Physical Description of the Universe. By Alexander von Humboldt. p489 This early description of Necho's expedition as a whole is contentious, it is recommended that one keep an open mind on the subject;The Cambridge History of the British Empire. CUP Archive, 1963. p56 but Strabo, Polybius, and Ptolemy doubted the description. Egyptologist A. B. Lloyd also sides with these Ancient Grecian scholars in doubting the event, attributing the development of the story to other events.Lloyd is to hold the position that geographical knowledge at the time of Herodutus was such that Greeks would know that such a voyage would entail the sun being on their right but did not believe Africa could extend far enough for this to happen. He suggests that the Greeks at this time understood that anyone going south far enough and then turning west would have the sun on their right but found it unbelievable that Africa reached so far south. He suggests that "It is extremely unlikely that an Egyptian king would, or could, have acted as Necho is depicted as doing" and that the story might have been triggered by the failure of Sataspes attempt to circumnavigate Africa under Xerxes the Great. For more on such opinion, see: Lloyd, Alan B. "Necho and the Red Sea: Some Considerations Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, Vol. 63, (1977), pp. 142-155 Regardless, it was believed by Herodotus and Pliny,The Geographical system of Herodotus By James Rennel. p348+ along with other Egyptologists.History of Egypt. By F. C. H. Wendel. American Book Co., 1890. p127 (cf. Herodotus relates a story of a great maritime enterprise undertaken at this time which seems quite credible. He states that Nekau sent out Phoenician ships from the Red Sea to circumnavigate Africa, and that in the third year of their journey they returned to the Mediterranean through the Straits of Gibraltar.)The Story of the Pharaohs. By James Baikie. p316

===Death and succession===

Necho II died in 595 BC and was succeeded by his son, Psamtik II, as the next pharaoh of Egypt. Psamtik II, however, later removed Necho's name from almost all of his father's monuments for unknown reasons. Yet some scholars, such as Roberto Gozzoli, express doubt that this actually happened. He points to the evidence being fragmentary and rather contradictory.Gozzoli, R. B. (2000), The Statue BM EA 37891 and the Erasure of Necho II's Names Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 86: 67–80

==Further reading==

==See also==

==References==

==External articles==


