[[Telar Ring Deng]]

CATEGORIES: Sudan People's Liberation Movement politicians, People from Lakes (state), Living people, Pharmacists

Telar Ring Deng is a South Sudanese politician. Telar is an Atout Dinka, hailing from Yirol.Africa Confidential, Vol. 46–47. Miramoor Publications Limited, 2005. p. 26 When the SPLA split, Telar sided with SPLA-Nasir.Sudan Democratic Gazette: A Newsletter for Democratic Pluralism, Eds. 20–43. 1992. p. 8 Together with Deng Ayuen Kurr, Telar was the most prominent Dinka leader in SPLA-Nasir.Sudan Update, Vol. 3–5. Committee for Peace and Reconstruction in Sudan, 1991. p. 13 Telar and Deng accompanied Lam Akol during his two-month stay in Western Europe. However Telar and Deng left SPLA-Nasir after the Frankfurt talks, disappointed that separation had not been mentioned in the documents of the peace talks and the rapprochement between SPLA-Nasir and the Khartoum government. Telar and Deng returned to the mainstream faction of the SPLA/SPLM.Lesch, Ann Mosely. The Sudan: Contested National Identities. Bloomington u.a.: Indiana Univ. Press u.a., 1998. p. 268
Telar also represented the New Sudan Council of Churches for a period.Canada. Parliament. Senate. Debates of the Senate: Official Report (Hansard)., Eds. 1–23. Queen's Printer., 1999. p. 378 He was also a negotiator for Riek Machar during reconciliation with the SPLM.
He  reappointed by President Kiir as  Legal Advisor a post that he served before named designate Justice Minister 
During the CPA period, Telar was named Minister of the Presidency of Southern Sudan. However, he was expelled from the SPLM by a presidential decree of President Salva Kiir on November 23, 2007.Ostrowski, Zygmunt L. Soudan: conflits autour des richesses. Paris: Harmattan, 2010. p. 113 Telar was reinstated as a SPLM member on August 28, 2009.SPLMToday.com. SPLM Reinstates Telar Ring and Aleu Ayieny
In 2013 Telar was named Minister of Justice by President Salva Kiir. However, on August 13, 2013 the parliament of South Sudan voted by majority against Telar's nomination.SudanTribune. S. Sudan MPs reject Telar’s appointment as justice minister 150 MPs voted against Telar's appointment, 97 in favour. This was the first time a presidential nomination for minister had been rejected by the South Sudanese parliament.Voice of America. S. Sudan Parliament Rejects Kiir's Justice Nominee

==References==


