[[Bones of the Buddha]]

CATEGORIES: British films, English-language films, Documentary television films, 2013 television films, Films set in India, Documentary films about science, History of India, History of Buddhism

Bones of the Buddha is a 2013 television documentary produced by Icon Films and commissioned by WNET/THIRTEEN and ARTE France for the National Geographic Channels. It concerns a controversial Buddhist reliquary from the Piprahwa Stupa in Uttar Pradesh, India. It was released in May, 2013, and was broadcast in July 2013 in the US on PBS as part of the Secrets of the Dead series.

==Content==

Writer and host Charles Allen investigates the Piprahwa Stupa, a large Buddhist Stupa which is argued to be one of the eight resting places of the Buddha's ashes.The Buddha and Dr Fuhrer, (2008) Charles Allen, Haus Publishing, Londonpiprahwajewels.co.uk In 1898, estate manager W.C. Peppé excavated the stupa, finding a large brick dome with a sarcophagus, or coffer, at the center. Inside were four vessels (three stoneware, one glass) along with about 1600 small jewels and gold pieces — the Piprahwa treasure — all of undetermined age. One of the stoneware vessels — the "Piprahwa reliquary" — contained jewels mixed with human ashes and bone. Peppé made the mistake of consulting Dr Alois Anton Fuhrer — a German archaeologist who soon became notorious for forging other Buddhist relics — and the Piprahwa find, along with Peppé's own reputation, were soon irretreviably tainted with scandal and the "Buddha's bones" discredited in the professional archeological world. In presenting the background to the story, Allen visits the Buddhist sites of Kushinagar and Sanchi, as well as the old Peppé family manor house, now in a state of extreme neglect.
Allen interviews Prof. Harry Falk (professor of Indology at the Freie Universität in Berlin and said to be the "world's foremost expert" in ancient Indian languages and history), who states that Fuhrer could not have forged the Piprahwa reliquary inscription. This is, Falk says, because he lacked sufficient knowledge of the language (Prakrit) in which its inscription was written, and, more importantly, he could have never known the Sanskrit word nidhane ("container"), which is written on the reliquary, a hapax legomenon (unique example) in the entire corpus of Brahmi script. That said, however, it should be noted that Fuhrer had taught Sanskrit for three years at St. Xavier's College, Bombay, that he had translated Sanskrit texts, and that nidhane occurs commonly enough in such Sanskrit textual sources.
Falk concludes that the reliquary found at Piprahwa did contain a portion of the ashes of the Buddha, and that the inscription is authentic. According to him, the inscription translates as "these are the relics of the Buddha, the Lord".Excerpt from The Bones of the Buddha The conclusion is that the Piprahwa Stupa was built by the Emperor Ashoka 150 years later in 245 BCE. He built it over the original and simpler interment site created by Shakya clansmen for the 1/8th of the Buddha's ashes they had been apportioned. Falk points to the close similarity of materials used at Piprahwa and its grand size with other Ashokan stupas, and that the coffer containing the reliquary found at Piprahwa closely reflects Ashokan workmanship, design, and the type of sandstone used for monuments like the Lumbini pillar erected during his reign. (In 1971, Indian archeologist K.S. Srivastava excavated deeper into the stupa than Peppé had, uncovering two chambers each containing a soapstone casket with redware frangments. This is taken as confirmation of the existence of an earlier, deeper burial site at Piprahwa dating back to the death of the Buddha.)

==References==


