[[Numerian]]

CATEGORIES: 284 deaths, 284 crimes, 3rd-century Roman emperors, Imperial Roman consuls, Roman emperors murdered by the Praetorian Guard, Crisis of the Third Century, Deified Roman emperors, Year of birth missing

Numerian ([tpl]lang-la|Marcus Aurelius Numerius Numerianus Augustus[/tpl];In Classical Latin, Numerian's name would be inscribed as MARCVS AVRELIVS NVMERIVS NVMERIANVS AVGVSTVS. died November 284) was Roman Emperor from 282 to 284 with his older brother Carinus. They were sons of Carus, a general raised to the office of praetorian prefect under Emperor Probus in 282.Leadbetter, "Carus."

==Reign==

In 282, the legions of the upper Danube in Raetia and Noricum proclaimed as emperor Numerian's father, the praetorian prefect Marcus Aurelius Carus, beginning a rebellion against the emperor Probus.Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius, p. 4; Leadbetter, "Carus"; Odahl, Constantine and the Christian Empire, p. 39; Southern, Severus to Constantine, p. 132; Williams, Diocletian, p. 32. Probus' army, stationed in Sirmium (Sremska Mitrovica, Serbia), decided they did not wish to fight Carus and assassinated Probus instead.Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius, p. 4; Odahl, Constantine and the Christian Empire, p. 39; Southern, Severus to Constantine, p. 132. Carus, already sixty, wished to establish a dynastyOdahl, Constantine and the Christian Empire, p. 39; Southern, Severus to Constantine, p. 132; Williams, Diocletian, p. 32. and immediately elevated Carinus and Numerian to the rank of Caesar.Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius, p. 4; Odahl, Constantine and the Christian Empire, p. 39; Williams, Diocletian, p. 32.
In 283, Carus left Carinus in charge of the West and moved with Numerian and his praetorian prefect Arrius Aper to the East to wage war against the Sassanid Empire. The Sassanids had been embroiled in a succession dispute since the death of Shapur and were in no position to oppose Carus' advance.Leadbetter, "Carus"; Odahl, Constantine and the Christian Empire, p. 39.
According to Zonaras, Eutropius, and Festus, Carus won a major victory against the Persians, taking Seleucia and the Sassanid capital of Ctesiphon (near modern Al-Mada'in, Iraq), cities on opposite banks of the Tigris.Zonaras, 12.30; Eutropius, 9.14.1; Festus, 24; Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius, 4; Leadbetter, "Carus"; Odahl, Constantine and the Christian Empire, p. 39; Potter, The Roman Empire at Bay, p. 279; Williams, Diocletian, p. 33. In celebration, Numerian, Carus, and Carinus all took the title Persici maximi.Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius, p. 4; Leadbetter, "Carus." Carus died in July or early August of 283, possibly due to a strike of lightning.Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius, p. 4; Leadbetter, "Carus"; Odahl, Constantine and the Christian Empire, p. 39; Southern, Severus to Constantine, p. 133; Williams, Diocletian, pp. 33–34.

===Numerian and Carinus as Augusti===

The death of Carus left Numerian and Carinus as the new Augusti. Carinus quickly made his way to Rome from Gaul, arriving in January 284, while Numerian lingered in the East.Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius, p. 4. The Roman retreat from Persia was orderly and unopposed, for the Persian King, Bahram II, was still struggling to establish his authority.Southern, Severus to Constantine, p. 133.
By March 284, Numerian had only reached Emesa (Homs) in Syria; by November, only Asia Minor.Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius, p. 4; Leadbetter, "Numerianus." In Emesa he was apparently still alive and in good health, as he issued the only extant rescript in his name there.Codex Justinianus 5.52.2; Leadbetter, "Numerianus"; Potter, The Roman Empire at Bay, p. 279. Coins were issued in his name in Cyzicus at some time before the end of 284, but it is impossible to know whether he was still in the public eye by that point.Roman Imperial Coinage 5.2 Numerian no. 462; Potter, The Roman Empire at Bay, pp. 279–80).
After Emesa, Numerian's staff, including the prefect Aper, reported that Numerian suffered from an inflammation of the eyes and had to travel in a closed coach.Leadbetter, "Numerianus." When the army reached Bithynia, some of Numerian's soldiers smelled an odor reminiscent of a decaying corpse emanating from the coach. They opened its curtains and found Numerian dead.Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius, p. 4; Leadbetter, "Numerianus"; Odahl, Constantine and the Christian Empire, p. 39; Williams, Diocletian, p. 35.

===After Numerian's death===

Aper officially broke the news of Numerian's death in Nicomedia (İzmit) in November 284. Numerian's generals and tribunes called a council for the succession and chose as emperor Diocletian, commander of the cavalry arm of the imperial bodyguard,Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius, p. 4; Barnes, New Empire, p. 31; Bowman, "Diocletian", p. 68; Mathisen, "Diocletian"; Williams, Diocletian, p. 33, 35-36. despite Aper's attempts to garner support.Potter, The Roman Empire at Bay, p. 280. The army of the east gathered on a hill outside of NicomediaBarnes, Constantine and Eusebius, pp. 4–5; Odahl, Constantine and the Christian Empire, pp. 39–40; Williams, Diocletian, pp. 36–37.  and unanimously saluted their new Augustus. Diocletian accepted the purple imperial vestments and raised his sword to the light of the sun, swearing an oath denying responsibility for Numerian's death. He asserted that Aper had killed Numerian and concealed the deed. In full view of the army, Diocletian drew his blade and killed Aper.Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius, pp. 4–5; Leadbetter, "Numerian"; Odahl, Constantine and the Christian Empire, pp. 39–40; Williams, Diocletian, p. 37.

==Character==

According to the unreliable Historia Augusta, Numerian was a man of considerable literary attainments, remarkably amiable, and known as a great orator and poet. No other sources, however, report anything about his personality.

==Notes==

==References==

===Primary sources===

 
 

===Secondary sources===

 
 

==External links==


