[[Thomas Mortimer]]

CATEGORIES: Irish judges, Irish politicians, Mortimer family, English military personnel, 14th-century English people

Sir Thomas Mortimer (c.1350-1403) was an English soldier, statesman and judge of the late fourteenth century who served briefly as Lord Deputy of Ireland and Lord Chief Justice of Ireland. He is best remembered for killing Sir Thomas Molineux, the royal commander, at the Battle of Radcot Bridge, an act which ultimately led to his conviction for treason and death in exile.

==Background==

He was an illegitimate son of Roger Mortimer, 2nd Earl of March, but seems to have been treated very much as one of the family. By 1380 he had acquired considerable military expertise, and had been knighted. When his legtitmate brother  Edmund Mortimer, 3rd Earl of March was made  Lord Lieutenant of Ireland in 1379, Thomas went with him to Ireland and acted as his Deputy, holding in his name a Great Council at Clonmel.Otway-Ruthven, A.J.  History of Medieval Ireland Barnes and Noble Reissue 1993 p.315 March was charged with subduing the Gaelic clans in Ulster and Munster, but had only limited success.

==Lord Deputy of Ireland==

Edmund's sudden death in December 1381 left the Dublin Government in a quandary, since there were very few men willing to assume the office of Lieutenant, at a time of exceptional political turbulence. Richard Wyre, Bishop of Cloyne, proposed that Thomas Mortimer should be Lord Lieutenant, both because of his military experience and his ability to retain the loyalty of his brother's retinue.Otway-Ruthven pp.315-6 In the event King Richard II appointed Thomas' nephew, Roger Mortimer, 4th Earl of March, a child of seven. The absurdity of this choice was lessened by the appointment of Thomas as Deputy and Chief Justice.Otway-Ruthven p.316

==Return to England==

On the appointment of Philip Courtenay as Lieutenant, Thomas returned to England. His nephew's wardship had been entrusted to a group of magnates which included Richard FitzAlan, 11th Earl of Arundel, to whom Thomas was close. It was evidently Arundel who appointed Thomas steward of the Mortimer estates during Roger's minority, thus greatly enhancing his status.Dunn, Alistair  Richard II and the Mortimer Inheritance  in "Fourteenth-century England"  Given-Wilson ed. Boydell Press 2002 p.162 As Roger grew older he and his uncle became close, going hunting together and exchanging gifts of wine: Dunn suggests that Thomas was the closest Roger ever knew to a father.Dunn p.164

==The Appellants==

Arundel was a  key member of the Lords Appellant, the group of magnates who emerged as opponents of  Richard II and the royal favourite Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland. Mortimer was cloely associated with them and is known to have visited Arundel regularly during the critical  year 1387. 

===Radcot Bridge===

See main article: Battle of Radcot Bridge
In December 1387, at Radcot Bridge, the Appellants clashed with de Vere and a royal force headed by Sir Thomas Molineux, Constable of Chester Castle; de Vere was defeated and forced to flee. Mortimer himself killed Molineux, one of the few casualties.Dunn p.162 According to Holinshed, Molineux, who had attempted to flee, pleaded for his life, but Mortimer pulled off his helmet and stabbed him in the head with a dagger.Holinshed's Chronicles
During the brief rule of the Appellants, Mortimer was in high favour. He was appointed Justiciar of Ireland, but Richard countermanded the appointment, no doubt fearing that he would entirely lose control of Ireland to his enemies, and it never took effect. Thomas and his nephew Roger, with troops, accompanied the King on his Irish expedition in 1394;Otway-Ruthven p. 326 and when Roger was reappointed Lord Lieutenant in 1396, Thomas went to Ireland with him.

==Downfall==

In 1397 the King moved to destroy the surviving  Lords Appellant.  Arundel, Mortimer's  patron, was convicted of treason and executed. Mortimer was "appealed" for treason, in that his killing of Molineux, the King's commander, ten years earlier was an attack on the King himself. Mortimer was not permitted to stand trial, but ordered to surrender himself within three months. Unsurprisingly Mortimer chose flight: the King accused Roger, probably with good reason, of conniving at his uncle's escape.Otway-Ruthven p.337 Thomas was declared a traitor and his lands forfeit. He fled to Scotland where he died early in 1403.

==Marriage==

He married Agnes de Poynings, daughter of Michael de Poynings, 2nd Baron Poynings  and widow of William Bardolf, 4th Baron Bardolf. There is no record of any children.

==Character==

Although the details (if accurately reported) of his killing of Molineux show him in a rather sinister light,  Mortimer had the respect and esteem of many, including his brother and nephew; the chronicler Adam of Usk knew him personally and praised him as "a vigorous knight".Dunn p.164

==References==


