[[Brim Fuentes]]

CATEGORIES: American graffiti artists

Brim Fuentes, is the founding member of graffiti crew TATS CRU, and was born in the South Bronx,New York City.

File:

Brim was fortunate enough to start writing graffiti
in one of the most important periods of graffiti
history. He began bombing and hitting NYC
subway trains, in the late 1970s, all the way
through to the mid 1980s. When the subways underwent
the buff, him and the rest of TATS CRU
took to the streets and began bombing and
creating street art all over the city.
Brims friendship to Afrika Bambaataa, and the
almighty Universal Zulu Nation led to Brim being featured
in one of the most important videos in
hiphop culture, “Afrika Bambaataa -
Renegades of Funk”,
Brim was also featured
in many other important documentaries and
movies about Hip-Hop and graffiti culture from that
time period including Dick Fontaine's 1987 documentary "Bombin" where he was introduced to fellow British graffiti artists Goldie  and 3D (who later went on to form Massive Attack) .25th Anniversary Of The Bombin Documentary  Brim became Goldie's artistic mentor, New York was the place that lifted his horizons, and America was where he would later become "Goldie".Brim became Goldie's artistic mentor
Brim was documented as the first graffiti artist to come to the UK and appeared on many TV stations and newspapers including the front page of the Daily Telegraph discussing this graffiti culture. Upon this media frenzy Brim was invited to lecture at Oxford University and was asked personally by Michael Winner to create the backdrops in his film Death Wish 3 which starred Charles Bronson.
The prequel to this film was BBC'S 1984 Beat This: A Hip-Hop History The film included footage from DJ Kool Herc's original parties, The Cold Crush Brothers, Jazzy Jay, Soul Sonic Force and Afrika Bambaataa. The film featured Brim's take on graffiti in New York. The film was one of the first documentaries about Hip-Hop.
Brim would go on to form a clothing line FJ560 with then famous rapper and friend Fat Joe The flagship store was located in the Bronx, New York City. Fat Joe, The Terror Squad and Big Pun can be seen in many videos wearing FJ560. Fat Joe would paint with TATS CRU before he was a famous rapper.
Brim and TATS CRU would be heavily involved with advertisement for Fat Joe and created painted billboards across the city promoting his album releases.
By becoming such an iconic figure in the world of art he received a mention alongside other TATS CRU members in the KRS-One track "Out For Fame"
On the passing of Big Pun, TATS CRU painted the memorial wall that is visited daily from tourists from around the world paying their respects to the rap superstar.
Brim is currently working on the Big Pun statue project that will create a 3D memorial wall in honor of the late Big Pun
With the future in mind, Brim continues to develop
cutting edge art, murals, paintings and
sculptures, with the same flavor and vigor as
the young boy that first awed the world in the
beginning of the hip hop movement.
Brim currently lives in China."

==Artworks==

==Filmography==

==External links==

==References==


