[[Reasonable Faith (book)]]

CATEGORIES: Christian apologetics, Contemporary philosophical literature, Books about Christianity, Criticism of atheism, Religious philosophical literature

Reasonable Faith: Christian Truth and Apologetics (book) is widely acknowledged as William Lane Craig's signature book. In 1994, Dr. Craig published his first version of the book, which quickly widened his popularity among laymen and even professional philosophers and theologians. Reasonable Faith is intended primarily to serve as a textbook for seminary level courses on Christian apologetics; the book began as a set of lectures for Craig's own class on apologetics.
In 2008, Craig released the Third Edition of Reasonable Faith, which featured mild revisions to the previous version. This updated edition builds a positive case for Christianity by applying the latest thought to core theological themes. Key sections in the third edition have been updated to reflect the latest developments in astrophysics, philosophy, probability calculus, the arguments for the existence of God, and Reformed epistemology. Craig's approach gives careful attention to crucial questions and concerns, including: the relationship of faith and reason, the existence of God, the problems of historical knowledge and miracles, the personal claims of Christ, and the historicity of the resurrection of Jesus.http://apps.biola.edu/apologetics-store/products/books/item/reasonable-faith-christian-truth-and-apologetics-3rd-edition_Book
An introductory primer to Reasonable Faith is On Guard: Defending Your Faith with Reason and Precision, which is written at an easier level and does not go into any of the concepts presented in Reasonable Faith as deeply.

==Contents==

William Lane Craig structured Reasonable Faith around the loci communes of systematic theology, and some of the most frequently discussed today include de Scriptura sacra (doctrine of Scripture), de creatione (doctrine of creation), de peccato (doctrine of sin), de Christo (Christology), de gratia (soteriology), de ecclesia (ecclesiology), and de novisssimus (eschatology). For every topic, Craig first outlines the historical background of the issue in question to see how past thinkers have dealt with it. Second, he presents and defends his personal views on the topic, seeking to develop a Christian apologetic on the point. Third, he shares some thoughts and personal experiences on applying this material in evangelism. Finally, he provides bibliographical information on the literature cited or recommended for future reading.
Part One: De Fide
Part Two: De Homine
Part Three: De Deo
Part Four: De Creatione
Part Five: De Christo

==References==

==See also==


