[[Theerthamalai]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Dharmapuri district

Theerthamalai is an important Sacred place in Harur taluk of Dharmapuri district located in Tamil Nadu, India.
The name Theerthamalai in Tamil it means Hill with Holy Water.Theerthamalai is a village situated about 16 km north-east of Harur. Theerthagirishwarar temple is located at the top of a hillock. The temple situated about one km up the steep slope of a hillock derives its name from the five springs in the temple. Lord Theerthagireeswar (Lord Shiva) is the worshipping deity.

==History==

Theerthagirishwarar was built in 7th century and many contributions were made by the Vijayanagara Emperors, Chola and  Pandya Kings.Several Inscriptions can be found in the Theerthagireeswarar Temple.In the inscriptions on this temple says Chola emperors had regularly visited this temple including Rajendra Cholan.They relate to the Vijayanagar and Chola rulers. There is one inscription in ancient Telugu and Kannada. Poet Saint Arunagirinathar referred to the Temple of Theerthagirieeswarar in his compositions.

===Greatness of the Temple===

Lord Sri Rama after winning the war against Ravana and returning to Ayodhya wanted to perform Shiva Puja in this place.  As Sri Hanuman could not return in time with holy Ganga water and flowers from Kasi, Rama shot an arrow on rock creating the Rama Theertha and completed the puja.The Rama Theertham is tiny waterfall drops from a height of about 30 feet is perennial.During summer even when the river is dry there will be sweet water in the spring that flows from rock.Sri Hanuman threw the pot of water from here which fell at a distance of about 12 km from the hill and became Hanuman Theertham.  People take the first dip in Hanuman Theertha and then at Rama theertha for relief from sins.

==List of Theertham==

Theertham means Holy water in Tamil language.
All of which have their origin in different parts of the rocky surface,They are

==Festival==

The famous festivals of the temple are the 10 day Masi Brahmmotsavam in February–March with procession of the presiding Lord, car festival on the 7th day, wedding festival on the 5th day and Sathaparana festival – Lord in reclining posture on the 10th day; Abishek pujas with 365 litres of milk on the Chithirai new year day falling mostly on April 14 or a day earlier or later occasionally, Navarathri in September–October and Aadi 18 July–August with special abishek at night followed by Girivalam – circumambulation of the hill. The devotee crowd in the temple is usually big on Saturdays and Sundays. Pradosha is devotionally observed. Also Tamil and English New Year Day are observed in the temple.

==References==


