</ref> Public opinion polls taken in the fall of 1990 showed between 75 to 85 percent of Canadians were opposed to the GST bill, but at the same time, most people wanted an end of the "circus" in the Senate as the Liberal senators filibustered using such tactics such as "...hooting, catcalls, shouting, blowing kazoos, interminable reading of petitions name by name and other delaying measures".<ref name="Ulbrich"/> Through the often undignified behavior of the filibustering Liberal senators was not popular with the Canadian public, the GST was even more unpopular with 75% of Canadians saying in a 1991 poll that they were hostile to the new tax, which worked to Chrétien' benefit.<ref>Jeffrey, Brooke ''Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984 - 2008'', Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 page 202.</ref> In order to reinvigorate his leadership and reorganize his office which was in chaos under the leadership of Goldenberg, he hired an old friend and classmate, [[Jean Pelletier]], as his chief of staff in December 1990.<ref name="theglobeandmail.com">[tpl]cite news|author=Canada |url=http://www.theglobeandmail.com/servlet/story/RTGAM.20090110.wpelltier0110/BNStory/National/home |title=Jean Pelletier, 73 |publisher=The Globe and Mail |date= January 10, 2009|accessdate=2010-04-20 |location=Toronto[/tpl]</ref>
In December 1990, Chrétien returned to the House of Commons after winning a by-election in the safe Liberal riding of Beauséjour, New Brunswick. The incumbent, Fernand Robichaud, stood down in Chrétien's favour, which is traditional practice when a newly elected party leader does not have a seat in Parliament. Initially, Chrétien had planned to wait until the next general election before running, but was advised by Herb Gray that "To have credibility, you're got to be in the House. You can't afford to wait two more years until a general election".Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 31. Gray's appeal changed Chrétien's mind about when to seek a seat in the House of Commons.
In October 1991, Chrétien first gave his views about how best to end the recession which had began in 1990. Chrétien argued that the answer was a policy of slow devaluation where the dollar would be allowed to decline against other major world currencies, which would have the effect of both pricing out foreign imports and by giving Canadian firms a competitive advantage in world markets, boost exports.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 46. However, Chrétien concluded that his planned export offensive powered by a low dollar would come to nothing if other nations maintained tariffs to keep Canadian goods out of their markets. In order to make his plans to export Canada back into prosperity work, Chrétien decided that the solution was globalization. Besides for globalization, Chrétien also argued to combat the recession, the federal government needed to make the system of unemployment insurance less generous, and to end the policy of high interest rates maintained by the Bank of Canada governor John Crow to achieve his target of 0% inflation, which Chrétien argued was needlessly crippling the economy.   
In November 1991, Chrétien organised a party conference in Aylmer, Quebec where the Liberals formally disallowed most of the economic nationalism and protectionism of the Pearson-Trudeau years, and instead embraced globalization as the cure for the recession of the early 1990s.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 47-48. Reflecting the changed emphasis, at the Aylmer conference, the Liberals declared their support for the 1987 free trade agreement with the United States, which the party had famously promised to tear up if they won the 1988 election, and instead Mulroney was now denounced for not going far enough in opening up the economy by signing more free trade agreements with other nations. Reflecting the changed emphasis, Chrétien in a pointed symbolic move, had the outspoken pro-free trade Liberal Roy MacLaren sitting right besides him on his right while the equally outspoken anti-free trade Liberal Lloyd Axworthy sat at some distance from Chrétien on his left. Delivering the keynote speech at the Aylmer conference, Chrétien came out firmly in support of globalization, stating that: "Protectionism is not right wing or left wing. It is simply passé. Globalization is not right wing or left wing. It is simply a fact of life".Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 48. Chrétien's biographer Lawrence Martin wrote that the Aylmer conference marked Chrétien's first real achievement as Liberal leader, as it was the first time that he put forward a positive vision for Canada, instead of automatically opposing everything that Mulroney was doing without offering a constructive alternative.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 48. In an interview with Martin, Chrétien called himself a centrist by inclination, and stated that Aylmer conference was the beginning of his efforts to bring the Grits to the political center.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 48.    
Chrétien revealed himself to be a staunch "hard federalist" favoring a strong federal government at the expense of the provinces, much along the same lines as his predecessor Trudeau. However unlike Trudeau, Chrétien supported the Charlottetown Accord of August 1992, which proposed devolving federal powers to the provinces and once again recognized Quebec as a "distinct society".Martin, Lawrence Iron Man: The Defiant Reign of Jean Chrétien Toronto: Viking Canada, 2003 page 55. At the urging of Pelletier, Chrétien met secretly with Trudeau at the Royal York Hotel in Toronto where the two men argued about the meaning of "distinct society" for more than two hours. While the two did not resolve their differences, Trudeau promised to refrain from undermining Chrétien's authority in public. Trudeau denounced the Accord at the Maison Egg Roll in Montreal on 1 October 1992. Chrétien had major reservations about the Charlottetown accord, but as his opposition to Meech had done him much damage in Quebec, he was anxious not to be seen as an opponent of another set of constitutional amendments designed to secure Quebec's ratification of the 1982 constitution, especially as in many respects Charlottetown was very similar to many of the amendments that Chrétien had proposed to Meech Lake in 1990. Chrétien endorsed the Charlottetown accord on the rather negative grounds that the constitutional debate of the late 1980s-early 1990s were destroying Canada, saying it "was bleeding the nation to death" and that Charlottetown was the best way of ending that debate in order to move political debate back to the economic recession, which had began in 1990. At a Liberal caucus meeting on 8 September 1992 Chrétien declared that "if we had been the government we would not have made this deal", and that only reason to support Charlottetown was that to reject it would increase support for Quebec separatism.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984 - 2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 page 216.  The unity minister Joe Clark recalled that Chrétien did not champion the Charlottetown accord in the 1992 referendum with any great conviction or passion, stating: "We were trying to bring everybody into the tent on it, and I made a practice taking proposals to the other party, particularly Chrétien...I just didn't think he was following the issue...I don't know what it was...But it left me with was the belief that here was a guy for whom the substance of things doesn't matter much."Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 56 During the 1992 referendum, Chrétien kept a low profile, and delivered only a few speeches in favor of Charlottetown.Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984 - 2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 page 219.
When Progressive Conservative Prime Minister Brian Mulroney began to lose ground in the polls, Chrétien was the major beneficiary. In preparation for the 1993 election, Chrétien won the right to have the final say over riding nominations and to veto any candidate that displeased him. Chrétien's use of this power caused some protests within the Liberal Party with John Nunziata publicly complaining that "The backroom guys have taken control of the party. I guess they think they can muzzle us all". Chrétien told one prospective Liberal candidate Hec Clouthier, who informed Chrétien that was probably going to win the nomination to be the Liberal candidate for Renfrew—Nipissing—Pembroke, defeating the incumbent Len Hopkins that: "Well, you might the nomination. But you're not going to get the chance...I am the boss. I have the right to make this decision. I have an agenda for this country. I want to be prime minister and do great things, and I've got to put people in place who I can know can win".Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 pages 57-58 Chrétien added that he knew Hopkins could win because he won his seat eight times in a row while Clouthier had no equivalent record. When Clouthier refused to withdraw his candidacy as ordered and looked certain to win the Liberal nomination for Renfrew—Nipissing—Pembroke, he was expelled from the Liberal Party.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man, Toronto: Viking, 2003 page 58. Chrétien was so confident that he was going to win the 1993 election that he formed his transition team in October 1992 to prepare for the hand-over of power 13 months before it actually happened.

==Prime minister==

===The 1993 election===

Mulroney's approval ratings declined and by 1993 opinion polls showed that his Progressive Conservative Party would almost certainly be defeated by the Liberals under Chrétien in the election due that year. Mulroney announced his retirement in February, and was succeeded by Minister of National Defence Kim Campbell in June. Campbell managed to pull the PCs to within a few percentage points of the Liberals by the time the writs were dropped in September.
Campbell, however, had little luck overcoming the tremendous antipathy toward Mulroney, despite a substantial bounce from the leadership convention. Chrétien saw an opportunity, and on September 19, he dropped a bombshell by releasing the entire Liberal platform. The 112-page document, Creating Opportunity, quickly became known as the Red Book because of its bright red cover. It was a very specific and detailed statement of exactly what a Chrétien government would do in office. The Red Book gave the Liberals the reputation as the party with ideas, since none of the other parties had anything comparable. Paul Martin, the man who led the team that produced the Red Book was less complimentary about the Red Book in private as during his time in office as Finance Minister, he was often reported to have said: "Don't tell me about the Red Book, I wrote the damn thing, and I know that it is a lot of crap!".Jeffrey, Brooke Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984-2008, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010 page 265.
The Liberals did not promise to remove the GST altogether as a revenue producing agent. Instead, the Red Book pledged to replace the GST "with a system that generates equivalent revenues, is fairer to consumers and to small business, minimizes disruption to small business, and promotes federal-provincial fiscal cooperation and harmonization." The full implications of the Red Book's promise to replace the GST by combining the federal and provincial sales taxes, namely an increase in the sales tax rate above the 7% rate set by the hated GST was not spelled out by the Red Book. Through the Red Book did not promise to abolish the GST, Liberal candidates were often less circumspect on the campaign trail with many giving the impression that a Liberal government would abolish the GST with for instance, Sheila Copps famously promising to resign within a year of taking office if the GST was not repealed.
Chrétien promised to renegotiate of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and reform to the unemployment insurance system. In regards to NAFTA, the Red Book pronounced itself in favor of a North American free trade zone in principle, but went on to accuse Mulroney of having given away too much to the Americans and Mexicans when he signed NAFTA in 1992, and stated that the Liberal government would renegotiate NAFTA on more favorable terms to Canada within six months of taking office. Failing that, the Red Book promised that Canada would renounce NAFTA. The main emphasis in the Red Book was on a promise to spend $6 billion on improving infrastructure in a Keynesian move to fight the recession of the early 1990s.Martin, Lawrence Iron Man , Toronto:Viking, 2003 page 65. As regarding the debt situation, Chrétien promised in the Red Book to reduce Canada's deficit to 3 per cent of GDP (the same debt to GDP ratio required to enter the European Union) within three years of taking office.[ref]
