[[The Duck Family (Disney)]]

CATEGORIES: Disney core universe characters, Fictional families, Disney comics characters, Fictional ducks

The Duck family is a fictional family created by The Walt Disney Company. Its best-known member is Donald Duck.
In the early 1950s Carl Barks was in his second decade of creating comic book stories starring Donald Duck and his various relatives. He had personally created several of the latter. Scrooge McDuck and Gladstone Gander being the most notable among them. But the exact relation between them was still somewhat uncertain. Barks decided to create a personal version of their Family tree. To better define their relations he added several previously unknown relatives. Barks never intended to publish this family tree as he had created it for his personal use.
The first public attempt at a coherent biography of the ducks was published in 1974. An Informal Biography of Scrooge McDuck by science fiction author Jack Chalker used names and events in the Barks stories (and a very few non-Barks ones) to create a life story for McDuck. It provided the basis for a Scrooge biography included in The People's Almanac."The People Who Never Were -- Yet Live Today." The People's Almanac, edited by David Wallenchinsky and Irving Wallace. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday & C., 1975. p. 1235-1237.
By 1978 the Duck family were ingrained sufficiently in popular culture that a character in the movie Corvette Summer quips "Just call me Gladstone Duck‏" after being lucky.Reviews & Ratings for Corvette Summer 
In 1981 Barks was well into his retirement but his stories remained popular and had gained him unexpected fame. He had given several interviews and answered questions about his personal views on the characters and their stories. Among other subjects, Backs described his early version of the family tree. Rough sketches of the tree were published in a number of fanzines. Fans of the characters were pleased for the background it added to them. At this point Mark Worden decided to create a drawing of this family tree including portraits of the characters mentioned. Otherwise Worden made few changes to the tree, most notably adding Daisy Duck as Donald's main love interest. His illustrated version of the tree was published at first in several fanzines and later in the Carl Barks Library. The later was a ten-volume collection of his works in hardcover black-and-white edition.
In 1987 Don Rosa, a long-time fan of Carl Barks and personal friend of Mark Worden, started creating his own stories featuring Scrooge McDuck and his various associates. His stories contained numerous references to older stories by Barks as well as several original ideas. After several years he gained a fanbase of his own. In the early 1990s Egmont, the publishing house employing Don Rosa, offered him an ambitious assignment. He was to create the definitive version of Scrooge's biography and a family tree accompanying it. This was supposed to end decades of contradictions between stories which caused confusion to readers. The project was to become The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck. The family tree accompanying it was first published in Norway on July 3, 1993.
In the process of working on Scrooge's biography, Rosa studied Barks' old stories mentioning his past. Then he added several ideas of his own. Among them were biographical information for Scrooge's supporting cast. In a way Scrooge's biography was also their own biography.

==Duck family members featured in the Family Tree by Don Rosa==

===Pintail Duck===

Pintail Duck first appeared in the story called Back to Long Ago which first appeared in Uncle
Scrooge #16. In that story it was revealed that he and his friend Matey Malcolm McDuck buried a
treasure of potatoes for Captain Loyal Hawk of The Falcon Rover. He drowned three days later and
was reborn as his descendant Donald Duck.
Don Rosa used Pintail in his version of The Donald Duck Family Tree, as the oldest Duck Family
member on the tree.

===Humperdink Duck===

Humperdink Duck was the husband of Grandma Duck (Elvira Coot) and grandfather of Donald
Duck. He worked as a farmer in Duckburg. He had three children with Grandma: Quackmore, Daphne, and Eider Duck. Humperdink Duck had relevant comic appearances in two stories by Don Rosa. "The Invader Of Fort Duckburg",Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story The Invader Of Fort Duckburg a chapter of the saga The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck, and "The Sign Of The Triple Distelfink".Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story The Sign Of The Triple Distelfink He was known as "Pa Duck" (later known as "Grandpa Duck").
Unlike his wife Elvira, whose parents and even a brother were identified by Don Rosa, who also decided she's the granddaughter of nothing less than the founder of Duckburg, Cornelius Coot, Humperdink's past before having a family with Grandma was never showed in the comics. According to Don Rosa, "the Duck family came from the British Isles, probably England".Who's who in Duckburg - Humperdink "Grandpa" Duck
In the story "The Good Old Daze" by Tony Strobl,Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story The Good Old Daze one of the most beloved duck masters of all-time, Grandpa Duck (an older Humperdink) appears in flashback taking care of little Donald along with Grandma. He's portrayed as a dedicated but rigorous grandfather. Grandpa's real name wasn't revealed in this story, but in an untitled one from 1951, where an old lover of Grandma called Humperdink has a cameo appearance. Don Rosa considered that this character became Donald's grandfather.Humperdink Dabney "Grandpa" Duck In this same story, Grandma remembers an occasion where she and Humperdink heard one of her favorite songs. She says to herself, "I remember the band played that for Humperdink and me at the Fish Peddler's Picnic in 1905!". Besides, Grandma finds the ruined coat Humperdink had used to let her not step on a mud puddle and some romantic letters addressed to her written by Humperdink. Then she remembers some sweet names Humperdink used to refer to her in those letters.
Humperdink appeared as "Grandpa Duck" in two comic stories previously mentioned. "The Good Old Daze" by Strobl and "The Sign Of The Triple Distelfink" by Rosa, but Strobl drew him with a quite long beard and some hair, while Rosa has drawn him with a short one and a full head of hair. In a comic story first published in 2013 Grandpa Duck (Strobl's version) appears in a flashback scene which is told by his wife Grandma Duck. This story is called "The Good Neighbors" by Lars Jensen and Flemming Andersen and makes part of the comic subseries Tamers of Nonhuman Threats.Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story The Good Neighbors

===Elvira "Grandma Duck" Coot===

Elvira "Grandma Duck" Coot is the grandmother of Donald Duck and Gladstone Gander, as well as the Duck family matriarch. In most stories, she is simply referred to as Grandma Duck. Grandma Duck was introduced to the Disney comic universe by Al Taliaferro in the newspaper comic strips - as a picture in 1940, in person in 1943. Taliaferro found inspiration for her in his own mother-in-law, Donnie M. Wheaton.
According to Don Rosa, Grandma was born around 1855. Later, she married Humperdink Duck, and they had three children named Quackmore Duck (Donald Duck's father), Daphne Duck (Gladstone Gander's mother) and Eider Duck (Fethry Duck's father). So fond  were Elvira and Humperdink of their children that they called themselves "Ma and Pa Duck" (again, according to Don Rosa). Quackmore married Hortense McDuck, and they were the parents of Della Duck and Donald Duck. When Della gave up on her difficult children, Huey, Dewey, and Louie, Grandma helped Donald to raise them. She shares the credit with the Junior Woodchucks for the trio evolving from little hellions to model children.
Grandma's great-nephew Gus Goose is her farmhand and lives on the farm. However, he is very lazy and does not work much. In some stories, especially older ones, Grandma Duck also gets help from Gus and Jaq, the two mice from Cinderella.
Grandma's farm is the center of the Duck family's annual holiday gatherings, with said gatherings usually arranged by her. These are always merry and warm and interesting occasions. Grandma Elvira is a great cook, and once won a medal for her cherry pie.
She is depicted as driving a Detroit Electric automobile. She refuses to acquire any modern gadgetry, and only watches weather programs on the TV.
In The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck by Don Rosa it is shown that her father is Clinton Coot, her mother is Gertrude Gadwall, her grandfather is Cornelius Coot, and her brother is Casey Coot. (Her real name being "Elvira Coot" was also Rosa's addition.) In older Italian stories (including Marco Rota's From Egg to Duck), she is sometimes shown as Scrooge McDuck's sister, but this tradition is no longer alive. Occasionally they have also been portrayed as being cousins, another now rarely enforced tradition. The "truth" is that Scrooge is the brother of Elvira's daughter-in-law. For this relationship there is no word in the English language.
Grandma made her animated debut in the 1960 Wonderful World of Color episode "This is Your Life, Donald Duck", where she was voiced by June Foray. The episode depicted her great difficulty in raising Donald, a strong-willed and ill-tempered duckling from the moment he was hatched. She also made a non-speaking cameo in Mickey's Christmas Carol, as well can be spotted in background in episode of DuckTales "Horse Scents".
A great-great-great uncle of Grandma called Asa Duck appears in the comic story "Ye Olde Duck's Diary".Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Ye Olde Duck's Diary "...and he was one of the first citizens of Duckburg in the old days!", said Grandma about this ancestor.
Grandma meets a childhood sweetheart called Myron O'Duck in the comic story "Too Much Mush",Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Too Much Mush drawn by the famous American cartoonist Jack Bradbury. Myron and Grandma meet each other again fifty eight years after their last meeting and now they plan to marry, but what Grandma doesn't know is how opportunist the now old Myron became during all this time. According to this story, Grandma possibly is around 70 years old. "I've known Mr. O'Duck sixty years!", she said to her grandson Donald.

===Quackmore Duck===

Quackmore Duck was born in Duckburg, Calisota, United States in 1875 to Humperdink Duck and Elvira Coot. From an early age it was obvious he had a very nasty temper. He worked in his parents' farm till 1902 when he met Hortense McDuck and they became engaged. He started working for her brother Scrooge McDuck.
By 1908 he was helping Hortense and her sister Matilda McDuck run their brother's empire as Scrooge's chief accountant, mainly because Scrooge thought that as a possible heir he would probably work hard and stay honest. In 1920 he finally married Hortense and later in the same year became the father of twins: Donald and Della. So he and Hortense became parents when they already were more than 40 years old, according to Don Rosa.
He remained the chief accountant till 1930 when a fight between Scrooge and his family ended all relationships between them. Quackmore retired and it is believed he died sometimes around 1950, although his exact date of death and death place are still unknown.
"I shudder to imagine the kid that would come from that unholy union!", exclaimed Humperdink in "The Invader Of Fort Duckburg" by Don Rosa, predicting the type of child his grandson Donald would be because of the explosive temperaments of Quackmore and his wife Hortense. There is a panel in "The Sign Of The Triple Distelfink" by Rosa where Humperdink is behind Quackmore and Hortense during the birthday party of his daughter Daphne Duck, and his facial expression suggests he is disappointed with an argument between the couple. Since both characters have a quick temper, their marriage possibly was full of ups and downs.

===Daphne Duck===

Daphne Duck, according to Don Rosa's story "The Sign of The Triple Distelfink", is the daughter of Humperdink Duck and Elvira Coot. On the day of her birth, a traveling worker painted a giant sign of The Triple Distelfink on her parents' stable. The symbol was supposed to bring the baby luck, and it did: Daphne was always incredibly lucky.
She worked in her parents' farm until at least 1902. Later, she stopped working and started living on the things she won in contests.
She married Goosetave Gander and in 1920 became the mother of Gladstone Gander. The child was born on her birthday and under the protection of the same symbol as his mother.
Since Daphne's older brother, Quackmore Duck, married Scrooge's younger sister, Hortense McDuck, it may be possible to say that she and Scrooge became sister-in-law and brother-in-law in relation to each other. Therefore, Scrooge would be uncle by affinity of Gladstone.
Another character called Daphne Duck appears as the wife of Daffy Duck in a handful of 1960s' Looney Tunes shorts. She is a female version of Daffy, and is voiced by Mel Blanc.

===Goosetave Gander===

Goosetave Gander is Gladstone Gander's father. He was originally supposed to be married to Matilda McDuck but Carl Barks later changed his mind and had him married to Daphne Duck instead. They are considered the parents of Gladstone Gander; although his wife's and son's luck does not include him. "Us Ganders have never sunk low enough to associate with you Ducks!", exclaimed Gladstone to Donald in "Race to the South Seas" by Carl Barks,Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Race to the South Seas suggesting that there is a mutual antipathy between his father's family and his mother's.

===Eider Duck===

Eider Duck was first mentioned in August 1944 in the story "The Fighting Falcon" by Carl Barks. In this story, Donald receives a falcon called Farragut as a present by his uncle Eider who does not live in Duckburg. Farragut arrives inside a big box brought to Donald's house by an expressman. Barks never mentioned Eider again but Don Rosa decided to include him in his Duck Family Tree.
According to Rosa, Eider is the son of Humperdink Duck and Elvira Coot. As of 1902, he worked on his parents' farm. He later married Lulubelle Loon and became the father of at least two sons, Abner "Whitewater" Duck (originally called Whitewater Duck) and Fethry Duck.
Since Eider's older brother, Quackmore Duck, married Scrooge's younger sister, Hortense McDuck, it may be possible to say that he and Scrooge became brothers-in-law in relation to each other. Therefore, Scrooge would be uncle by affinity of Whitewater and Fethry, if they both would be Eider's sons indeed.

===Lulubelle Loon===

Lulubelle Loon  is the wife of Eider Duck. She has appeared on Don Rosa's Duck family tree as the mother of Abner "Whitewater" Duck and Fethry Duck, but she hasn't appeared anywhere else.

===Donald Duck===

===Della Duck===

Della Duck was first mentioned in a newspaper comic strip on October 17, 1937.
According to Don Rosa, she was the daughter of Hortense McDuck and Quackmore Duck and was "born" around 1920. Her twin brother is Donald Duck; she is also the mother of Huey, Dewey and Louie Duck.
The identity of the boys' father is something of a mystery, as he is hidden by a bird and several branches on Don Rosa's family tree. Very little is known about him. It was revealed in an early comic strip that Mr. Duck was sent to the hospital because Huey, Dewey and Louie placed a firecracker under his armchair as a prank, with disastrous results. It was because of this incident that Della (or "Dumbella" as she was called in the theatrical cartoon that introduced the nephews) sent her sons to her brother, Donald Duck. While originally meant to be a one-month stay, the nephews wound up staying with Donald permanently; the reasons for this are unknown. However, both she and Donald are linked to Scrooge McDuck in equal measure, and yet Donald is always referred to as Scrooge's closest living relative, suggesting she has disappeared or died.
She is referenced in the series PKNA. When Urk asks Duck Avenger (Donald Duck) whether he has a sister, Donald Duck answers "Yes."PKNA #24
Some stories written by Rosa also show Della as a child, alongside her brother Donald.

===Gladstone Gander===

Gladstone Gander is the son of Daphne and Goosetave Gander. Gladstone was created by Carl Barks and first appeared in the story "Wintertime Wager" in Walt Disney's Comics and Stories #88 (January, 1948). Gladstone is a lazy and infuriatingly lucky goose who never fails to upset his first cousin Donald Duck. Gladstone's luck defies probability and provides him with anything he desires, with hardly the need of effort. As Don Rosa has commented on the character: "Gladstone is unwilling to make the slightest effort to gain something that his luck cannot give him, and, when things go wrong, he resigns immediately, certain that around the next corner a wallet, dropped by a passer-by, will be waiting for him". For all his luck Gladstone has no achievements to be proud of and no true ambitions, as he is incapable of long-term planning. All of this is in stark contrast to his relative Scrooge McDuck, who is also capable of taking advantage of opportunities but works hard to create situations favorable for him, is strongly motivated by his ambitions and takes pride in forming his fortune by his own efforts.
He is a rival of Donald for the love of Donald's girlfriend Daisy Duck. Gladstone is also considered among the prime candidates for Scrooge McDuck's succession. For all of these reasons, he and Donald have formed an intense rivalry with each other. Gladstone's arrogance and outrageous luck, combined with Donald's own ego and belief he can still best him despite all odds---or as Don Rosa's version of Scrooge comments, "Donald's eternal tendency towards self-destruction"---have set the stage for many stories featuring the two cousins' confrontations. Occasionally, he is a rival to Scrooge McDuck himself who resents his complete reliance on his uncanny good fortune such as in the story "The Gold Nugget Boat."[tpl]cite journal|last=Barks|first=Carl|title=The Gold Nugget Boat|date=September 1961|series=Uncle Scrooge|issue=35|accessdate=17 September 2012[/tpl]  In such stories, often the only way Gladstone can be believably defeated is to have him win by the letter of the law while the heroes take the bigger prize. In the above story for example, Gladstone and Scrooge are competing in a gold prospecting contest in which Gladstone finds a gold nugget the nephews fashioned from a gold item Scrooge already owns to stop him from killing himself from overexertion in the contest.  Gladstone finds the nugget and returns to win, but Scrooge and his nephews then find a much bigger nugget they are able to fashion into a boat to return to civilization afterward with a monetary worth that is easily more than Gladstone's find. Another instance was in the "Salmon Derby", where Gladstone catches the biggest fish and wins a new car but Donald manages to save a wealthy tycoon's daughter and is able to purchase a much bigger car.
Barks gradually developed Gladstone's personality and at first used him frequently—in 24 stories between 1948 and 1953, the first five years of his existence. Gladstone's luck evolved slowly. In his first three appearances in 1948 ("Wintertime Wager", "Gladstone Returns", "Links Hijinks"), he was portrayed as the mirror image of Donald: an obstinate braggart, perhaps just a little bit more arrogant. In his next two appearances, "Rival Beachcombers" and "The Goldilocks Gambit", Gladstone is portrayed as merely lazy and irritable, and also gullible. The breakthrough of his lucky streak occurs in 1949, within the adventure story "Race to the South Seas". His and Donald's rivalry over Daisy is established in "Donald's Love Letters" (1949), "Wild About Flowers" (1950), and "Knightly Rivals" (1951), and as potential heirs to Scrooge's fortune in "Some Heir Over the Rainbow" (1953). After that, Barks felt unable to develop the character further, finding him basically unsympathetic, and began using him less frequently. But by then, Gladstone had found a steady place in the Duck universe. He was first used by an artist other than Barks in 1951: "Presents For All" by Del Connell and Bob Moore.
His exact relation to the Duck Family Tree is somewhat uncertain. In Carl Barks' original version of the family tree from the 1950s, Gladstone was the son of Luke the Goose and Daphne Duck who died by overeating at a free-lunch picnic. He was later adopted by Matilda McDuck and Goosetave Gander. Later, Barks is reported to have done away with the adoption, which was never featured in any story. (Of course, no stories denying the event were published.) In a more recent version of the family tree created by Don Rosa, Daphne Duck (Donald's paternal aunt) married Goosetave Gander and the two were Gladstone's parents. This is consistent with what Gladstone says in "Race to the South Seas": "Scrooge McDuck is my mother's brother's brother-in-law". Don Rosa's stories follow this viewpoint; in "The Sign of the Triple Distelfink" (first published on February 4, 1997), he added the fact that Gladstone was born on the day of Daphne's birthday on 1920, under the protection sign of the Triple Distelfink, thus inheriting his mother's luck.
Gladstone appeared in several episodes of the animated series DuckTales, where he was voiced by Rob Paulsen, later noted for playing Pinky on the cartoon Pinky and the Brain.  In the episode "Dime Enough for Luck", Gladstone is an unwitting stooge for Magica De Spell in one of her attempts to steal Scrooge's Number One Dime.  He returns in the episode "Dr. Jekyll & Mr. McDuck", where he accidentally bids on an item that turns out to be valuable. This inspires Scrooge to bid on the next item—a trunk containing Dr. Jekyll's formula—which sets the plot in motion. He appears as a main character in the Big Little Book series book "Luck of the Ducks" (1969). He also makes non-speaking cameo appearances in the episodes "Sweet Duck of Youth" and "Till Nephews Do Us Part", as well in episode of House of Mouse "Goofy For A Day". Gladstone appears in 2000 computer game Donald Duck: Goin' Quackers in his traditional role of Donald's rival for Daisy's affection, and every time a Boss Battle is about to start, Gladstone greets Donald, but always gets hurt, like, becoming squished by a giant bird, getting knocked off a building by a wrecking ball, being sent crashing to the bottom of a haunted mansion, and even gets sent back to Duckburg inside a pipe, and every time he gets hurt, he keeps saying that he's found a nickel.
Gladstone has a nephew called Shamrock Gander. Shamrock first appeared in a story printed in Daisy Duck's Diary Four Color #648 where he was shown to be as lucky as his uncle Gladstone. It is unknown how exactly Shamrock is Gladstone's nephew. He was used once in a Brazilian comic story, where he contests with Donald's nephews to get Daisy's nieces attention. The nephew of Gladstone called Clyde who appears in the Junior Woodchuck's story "The Visiting Clyde" does not seem to be Shamrock with another name.Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story The Visiting Clyde
Despite having an eternal crush on Daisy Duck, Gladstone has appeared in love with other duck girls in Italian and Danish comic stories. The most important one possibly is Linda, who really conquered Gladstone, making him want to give up all his luck, since she's unlucky and absolutely hates lucky people. She appeared in two subsequent comic stories.Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Gastone e la fortuna inopportunaCoa Inducks - Page to the comic story Gastone e il talismano annullafortuna According to the Italian comic story "Arriva Crunk!",Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Arriva Crunk! where an old fellow of Gladstone called Thomas Duckis (original Italian name) arrives at Duckburg along with his family, Gladstone had a crush on the now Thomas's wife Lorraine Duckis when Gladstone, Thomas and Lorraine were school friends. Thomas is a researcher in biology and is nicknamed "Crunk". Thomas and Lorraine have two kids, the pre-teen Kitty and her younger brother Tommy.

===Fethry Duck===

Fethry Duck was created for the Disney Studio Program by Dick Kinney and Al Hubbard and was first used in the story "The Health Nut", published on August 2, 1964. He is first seen running from the airport to Donald's house, implying he isn't a Duckburg citizen at that point in time. It is also shown that Donald and Fethry know each other from earlier, including Fethry calls Donald with a nickname, "Don". In a comic panel of "The Health Nut" story, Donald thinks to himself, "I think what his kick is this time?", making it clear that he knows about Fethry's tendency to come up with temporary interests every now and then. Kinney and Hubbard created this character to be a beatnik (meaning "a person who rejects or avoids conventional behavior") member of the Duck Family. The reason why Fethry wears a stocking cap is also revealed in "The Health Nut" (He was convinced by a self-help book author that one's head is healthier when it's kept hot). Fethry wears different colours of the same blouse depending on which country the story is published in: in Brazil, his blouse is generally yellow; in the Italian comics, he usually wears a red one; and, in the comic books of Egmont Publishing, the traditional color of his blouse is pink.
The early Fethry comics were created for the Disney Studio Program for publication outside of the United States. An exception to this are three stories with Fethry drawn by Tony Strobl that appeared in Gold Key Comics published in 1966 (Donald Duck #105 and #106 plus Walt Disney's Comics and Stories #304). Strobl actually drew more than two hundred comic stories with Fethry for the market outside USA. The first comic story with Fethry published in USA was "Donald's Buzzin Cousin",Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Donald's Buzzin Cousin which also shows him as a nonresident of Duckburg who is going to meet his cousin Donald after a long time, just like in "The Health Nut", but its plot is very different. Also some of the Fethry Studio Program stories were reprinted in the Wonderful World of Disney giveaway magazine published in 1969–1970 for Gulf Oil. Since the mid-1970s, Fethry has mostly appeared in European- and Brazilian-produced stories, including having his own comic book title in Brazil during the 1980s, which lasted 56 issues.
Hubbard & Kinney developed together more than fifty comic stories with Fethry for the market outside USA.Coa Inducks - Page to Al Hubbard's stories with Fethry Duck Curiously, the vast majority of these ones were published in Australia between 1964 and 1969, including Fethry appeared in eighteen Australian comic book covers around this time. Nine of these covers spotlighted the names of Donald and Fethry, as suggesting they were a comedy duo. The first Australian comic book cover that spotlighted Fethry Duck's name for the first time in Disney comics was published in 1965.Coa Inducks - Page to the Australian comic cook Giant (G Series) No. 338 Besides, Fethry had  a solo cover appearance in the comic book Giant (G Series) No. 475,Coa Inducks - Page to the Australian Comic Book Giant (G Series) No. 475 which was especially dedicated to stories where he was the main character. Even more surprisingly, the cover of this edition just spotlighted Fethry's name as well.
In Brazilian and Italian stories, Fethry is depicted in various occupations, including as a reporter (alongside his cousin Donald Duck and, sometimes, Daisy Duck) and comic strip artist for Scrooge McDuck's newspaper, the Duckburg Chronicle. Fethry has also gained a superheroic alter ego, The Red Bat (parody of Batman, like Donald's Paperinik), and a number of supporting characters, among them his girlfriend the urban hippie Gloria and his nephew the bratty Dugan Duck. After discovering Fethry is The Red Bat, Gloria also decided to become a superhero herself, so The Purple Butterfly (presumably a parody of Batgirl) was born, and she eventually ends up saving The Red Bat when he's in a jam. Gloria wears a hippie-like style of clothing and she usually is a carefree girl. She appeared as one of Daisy Duck's closest friends in some stories. But according to a couple of old Brazilian stories, Gloria wasn't the first and only love of Fethry. He had a goose-like girlfriend called Rita Gansa (original Brazilian name) whom he really liked before knowing Gloria.Coa-Inducks - Page for the character "Rita Gansa" Rita was actually his childhoold classmate. There is one story where Gloria and Rita contest against each other to know who is Red Bat's biggest fan.
According to a version of Don Rosa's Duck Family Tree, Fethry is the son of Eider Duck and Lulubelle Loon, is the cousin of Donald Duck, and has a brother named Abner Duck. However, since Fethry was not created by Carl Barks and was never used in any Barks stories, Rosa does not consider Fethry part of the Duck family. Be that as it may, due to editorial pressure stemming from the character's popularity in Europe, Rosa included him in the tree anyway — reluctantly, and only in select variations.[tpl]cite web|url=http://duckman.pettho.com/tree/tree_rosa.html |title=The D.U.C.K.man - Don Rosa's Duck Family Tree - Don Rosa's own comments |publisher=Duckman.pettho.com |date= |accessdate=2010-07-06[/tpl]
In personality, Fethry is an obsessive New Age thinker, eagerly trying to pursue various new hobbies and lifestyles based on books he has read or TV programs he has seen. Fethry is also quite a blunderer, however, so his new hobbies tend to cause chaos for his friends and family. In some Italian-produced comics, he is also noted for his great laziness, with his habit of sleeping at work becoming a running gag (notably, laziness is quite out of character for Dick Kinney's original, more active version of the duck).
With Donald, Fethry is a member of the Tamers of Nonhuman Threats, a special super-secret organization fighting hostile paranormal creatures of all sorts to protect the earth. These stories are all produced by Danish creative house Egmont Creative A/S and drawn by Flemming Andersen. They are published in pocketbooks.
Fethry also works, again together with Donald, for Scrooge McDuck's secret organization, originally (in Italian) called the P.I.A.. Besides, he started starring stories as an assistant of the detective Umperio Bogarto (an Italian character whose name is a play on "Humphrey Bogart") on 1996 and as Moby Duck's First Mate in the early 2000s.Coa-Inducks - Page to the comic subseries Le storie della Baia
In earlier times, Egmont used Fethry very seldom; from the late 1990s, however, Egmont decided to bring back the character and create a whole range of new stories around him, this time based on the original 1960s concept of the character.
Donald has often teamed up with Fethry to do all sort of jobs for Scrooge (usually with disastrous results), with Donald being the "straight man" and Fethry the "funny man". These terms are rather loosely applied, however, insofar as Donald's reactions to Fethry, and attempts to neutralize him, are often every bit as funny as Fethry's doings.
More recently (2003–present), Fethry's modern Egmont and 1960s Kinney/Hubbard stories have been published in Uncle Scrooge and Walt Disney's Comics and Stories.
In 1970s stories mostly drawn by Tony Strobl, Fethry is the owner of an over-friendly dog named Poochie. Some Brazilian cartoonists also used Fethry's little-known pet.Coa-Inducks - Index to stories with Poochie

===Whitewater Duck===

Whitewater Duck was created by Carl Barks and used by him only in the story "Log Jockey", published in Walt Disney's Comics and Stories #267 on December, 1962. According to that story, he is a distant cousin of both Donald Duck and Huey, Dewey, and Louie, and works as a lumberjack in the woods.
On Don Rosa's Duck Family Tree Whitewater's real name is stated to be Abner Duck, with "Whitewater" only being a nickname. He is also shown to be a son of Eider Duck and Lulubelle Loon and the brother of Fethry Duck, making him Donald's first cousin.
In his second appearance in a story, "Smarter Than The Toughies" (published in the USA in Uncle Scrooge #349) by Lars Jensen and Daniel Branca, Whitewater is instead shown to be the nephew of Scrooge McDuck's cousin Douglas, making him Donald's second cousin.
In his third appearance in a comic story, "Too Many Donalds" (as of July 2013 unpublished in the USA) by Lars Jensen and Carlos Mota, Whitewater was seen to be in a relationship with Donna Duck. In this story, Donald introduces Whitewater to Daisy as his distant cousin.

===Huey, Dewey and Louie Duck===

Also known for the nephews of Donald Duck

==Other Ducks==

===Daisy Duck===

Known as Donald's girlfriend

===April, May, and June Duck===

April, May, and June Duck are the triplet nieces of Daisy Duck. When they appear at family gatherings their parents are never present and they usually accompany Daisy. They presumably live in Duckburg. They were created by Carl Barks and were first used in a story published in February 1953, "Flip Decision". "I don't know how you knew I was here visiting my sister, but it's about time you showed up!", exclaimed Daisy to Donald in the first panel of its last page, making it clear that her nieces are daughters of some sister of her. In the comic story "Lady Lawmen" by Tony Strobl,Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Lady Lawmen Daisy and her nieces discover that Grandma has a secret in her past, and Daisy just pretends not to be interested in discovering this one, but then April, May and June catch her red-handed delving into a trunk of Grandma, and Daisy tries to justify it to her nieces by saying "It's our duty as concerned relatives to pry... I mean, study the history of our families!".
In some stories, mostly Dutch, they live along with their aunt, but in other comics, such as the comics by Barks, they are only visiting Daisy. The triplets act as Donald's nephews' (Huey, Dewey, and Louie Duck) female counterparts, occasional rivals, occasional friends, and occasional dates. They are members of the organization The Junior Chickadees, who serve as The Junior Woodchucks' female counterparts. Unusually for children of their age, the girls routinely wear high-heeled shoes.
Like the nephews, April, May & June usually wear the colors "Red", "Blue" and "Green", but unlike them, a color assignment has never been established. The girls also frequently wear "Yellow", "Purple" and "Orange". However, one might consider "blue" to be April's color since that was the color she wore when she appeared solo in "Dell Giant" #35. It is also unknown which nephew is paired with which niece when they double date with their Uncle Donald and Aunt Daisy.
In 1998, the editors of the Dutch 'Donald Duck' weekly magazine decided the three girls should be modernized, and they got permission from the Disney Company to do so. Dutch Duck-comic artist Mau Heymans designed a new hairdo and new wardrobe for April, May and June. They now don't look the same at all in Dutch stories, and don't have the 'girly' occupations anymore they had when Barks created them. In some Danish stories, the new hairdo has been copied.
April, May, and June were not seen in animation until they were given a special cameo appearance in the House of Mouse episode "Ladies' Night".Ladies' Night. ''The Encyclopedia of Disney Animated Shorts. Retrieved on March 22, 2008.
Curiously, April, May, and June never appeared on DuckTales, but Webby Vanderquack from said series, strongly resembles them. That even led Dutch translators to give Webby the name 'Lizzy', which is used for April in Dutch. May and June are called Juultje and Babetje in The Netherlands.Webby Vanderquack. ''Dutch Wikipedia. Retrieved on March 22, 2008.
April, May, and June returned to American comics in Walt Disney's Comics And Stories #698. The story had them retelling "Little Red Riding Hood" with the girls as red and the Beagle Boys as the wolf.
April, May and June Duck were clearly created by Barks to be Huey, Dewey and Louie Duck's childhood sweethearts, therefore it's very controversial to consider that the father of this set of triplet boys and the mother of this set of triplet girls are both Daisy's siblings, since the two sets of triplets would be first cousins in this case. But there would be no controversy if Donald and Daisy were really second cousins, according to some Duck family trees, since their respective nephews and nieces would be third cousins in this case.
Like Huey, Dewey and Louie, April, May and June also own parents with the same surname, Duck.

===Moby Duck===

Moby Duck was created by writer Vic Lockman and illustrator Tony Strobl in a 1967 comic book story ("A Whale of an Adventure", Donald Duck #112, March 1967). He made his first animated appearance in the Walt Disney's Wonderful World of Color episode "Pacifically Peeking" (October 6, 1968). The name Moby Duck is a spoof from the classic Herman Melville novel Moby-Dick. He first appeared in Donald Duck #112 where he is seen saving Donald from drowning at sea, after Donald was forced to accept Moby's purpose to work as his helper, since Moby's porpoise Porpy pretended to be a threatening shark. Later that year Moby got his own comic book title which ran 11 issues until 1970, and then from 1973 to 1978 (issues #12-30). Illustrators of American Moby Duck stories include Strobl, Kay Wright, and Pete Alvarado. Not seen in the USA for two decades, he was used in a comic subseries produced in Italy during the 2000s. Curiously, Moby had two cameo appearances in the 2010s already. The first one was in an Italian story from 2010,Coa-Inducks - Page to the comic story "Zio Paperone imperatore domestico" and the second one was in the Darkwing Duck / Ducktales crossover called "Dangerous Currency" from 2011.Eric’s BOOM! Studios Comic Review: DARKWING DUCK/DUCKTALES: DANGEROUS CURRENCY TPB His only appearances in animation are in a 1968 The Wonderful World of Disney show and a cameo appearance seated at one of the tables in the House of Mouse TV series.
Moby has a quick temper and he can be really rude sometimes, not showing any remorse when he acts this way. He also shows a male chauvinist behavior in some stories. Moby is a disaster as a whaler, but a good sailor in general. He makes a living out of carrying cargo, especially for Scrooge McDuck. He also fights pirates and other villains, including the Beagle Boys, Mad Madam Mim, Emil Eagle, The Big Bad Wolf, and Captain Hook. There isn't any comic story where Moby was shown harpooning a whale indeed, however in the American comic story "Whale Bait",Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Whale Bait first published on 1969, when Gyro Gearloose asks him why he's so gloomy, he exclaims, "Whales  are scarcer than hen's teeth lately!", suggesting that he had successfully hunted whales on some occasions. But this same story also shows Moby developing affection for whales when he comes face to face with one of them for the first time and hesitates to use the harpoon of his whaler on that one, exclaiming "I-I can't! I never got so cozy with whales before as to look into their big tender pink eyes!". In the Danish comic story "Miraculous Bait",Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Miraculous Bait first published on 1972, Moby reveals to Gyro Gearloose that he never could hunt any whale, and for this reason he is using his whaler to deliver letters. In the half-page Danish story "Hitting The Tooth Mark",Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Hitting The Tooth Mark first published on 1973, Moby asks himself, "Why do I have a harpoon cannon?" (informal translation from the following excerpt in German language, "Wozu hab' ich überhaupt eine Harpunierkanone?"), since he realizes that he never used this one for hunting a whale. Moby even joined forces with a female animal rights activist to save a whale belonging to a Scrooge McDuck's enterprise called Sea Kingdom, as seen in the comic story "A Whale's Ransom".Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story A Whale's Ransom
Moby is a relative of Donald Duck as seen in "Sea Dog's Holiday" by Vic Lockman and Kay Wright.Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Sea Dog's Holiday There are American old stories where Moby seems to be familiar to other members of Donald's paternal family as well, like Grandma Duck and Gladstone Gander. In the comic story "The Dread Sea Adventure" by Lockman and Wright,Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story The Dread Sea Adventure Grandma exclaims when she sees Moby, "Moby Duck, you salty old sea biscuit!", making it clear that she knows him very well.
Donald was Moby's first mate for a while but he was replaced by Dimwitty Duck (and, on rare occasions in the comic books, by Goofy). There are a couple of stories featuring Moby where Donald and Dimwitty appeared together working for Moby as his crew. The Spanish cartoonist Antoni Gil-Bao used the duo Moby and Dimwitty in various Danish comic stories.Coa Inducks - Page for Antoni Gil-Bao's stats Porpy also appears in many Moby's stories.
Moby was one of the few secondary characters selected to own a small figurine in two collections made by De Agostini, Disney Parade and Disney Collection.

===Dimwitty Duck===

Dimwitty Duck (originally just called Dim-Witty) is an anthropomorphic duck who was introduced in the comic story "The Vanishing Banister",Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story The Vanishing Banister where he appears as an assistant of Donald Duck, who in turn appears working as a private detective. Daisy Duck has a brief appearance in the beginning of this one. But there are some old American stories with Dimwity and Daisy where Donald doesn't appear. In the story "On Disappearing Island",Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story On Disappearing Island Dimwitty appeared for the first time as Moby's ship hand and from then on he became the most common supporting character in Moby's stories. Dimwitty is incredibly clumsy but he's loyal and subservient, and maybe that's the reason why Moby keeps him as his ship hand. But a close kinship between them could also explain this fact. Dimwitty is taller than Donald and Moby. In some 1970s stories, Dimwitty was shown as a friend of Gus Goose.
There are some old stories where it's revealed that Dimwitty's surname is also Duck. The first one was "The Fix-it-fiasco",Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story The Fix-it-fiasco which also features Daisy. Therefore, he could be considered as a close or distant cousin of Donald and/or Daisy.
Just like Moby, Dimwitty had also a cameo appearance in the Darkwing Duck / Ducktales crossover called "Dangerous Currency" from 2011.
A character called Dim-Witty Jr., who appears in the Junior Woodchuck's comic story "The Green Gauntlet",Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story The Green Gauntlet apparently would be son of Dimwitty, since their respective names, looks and behaviors are very similar, including they both wear clothes with a "D" on it. Dimwitty has the initial letter of his name on his long hat, while Dim-Witty Jr. has this same symbol on his orange blouse. Dim-Witty Jr. is called Dimmy by Huey, Dewey and Louie. Moby also calls Dimwitty Dimmy in some of his stories with his first mate.

===Dickie Duck===

Dickie Duck (Paperetta Yè-Yè in Italian) is a character in the Scrooge McDuck universe created by Romano Scarpa. She was introduced as Goldie O'Gilt's granddaughter. But in the story "Paperetta e la leggenda del luna park" by Romano ScarpaCoa Inducks - Page to the comic story Paperetta e la leggenda del luna park she calls Huey, Dewey and Louie cuginetti (small/young cousins) (it's in the third panel of its first page) and then cugini (cousins) (it's in the fourth panel of its second page), what suggests that she and Donald's nephews share the same surname in English language because of a kinship. Dickie doesn't own an official family name in Italy, being "Yè-Yè" a reference to Yé-yé, a style of pop music of the early 1960s, which she uses with her original name, "Paperetta", as if to show her love for pop music. She has become popular in Italy, Denmark, Brazil and some other countries, while she is almost unknown in the USA and others. Dickie clearly seems to be older than Huey, Dewey and Louie. According to Scarpa, she completed her secondary education at a boarding school, so she possibly is around 18 years old.
The connection between Goldie and Dickie isn't largely accepted, despite they made two appearances together as grandmother and granddaughter. The first one was in the Italian story "Arriva Paperetta Yè-Yè" (free translation: "The Arrival of Dickie Duck"),Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Arriva Paperetta Yè-Yè which introduced Dickie in this particular universe. In this story, Goldie dropps Dickie off because she cannot take care of her anymore, so she asks Scrooge McDuck to do it for her. And the second one was in another Italian story called "Zio Paperone Pigmalione" ("Uncle Scrooge Benefactor"),Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Zio Paperone Pigmalione where Dickie appears living in Duckburg as Scrooge's house guest. But in later stories with her, she lives in her own house.
Sometimes Dickie has worked as a reporter for Brigitta McBridge or for Scrooge's little known brother Gideon McDuck.
In Brazil, their name is Pata Lee, (on a reference to the singer Rita Lee) she appeared in her own series with her teen friends the short owl Nettunia, the tall crane Olympia, the handsome pelican Walter, and Beckett, who's actually the name given to the old cartoon character Aracuan Bird, in a series of stories titled Os Adolescentes (translated loosely from Portuguese to The Teenagers) as a bonus story in Ze Carioca (a comic book starring José Carioca). Nettunia, Olympia and Walter were specially created to be part of Dickie's gang by Brazilian Disney Studios, which belongs to Grupo Abril. That was the first (and probably only) time that a teen gang was introduced in the "Duckverse" (a usual nickname used to refer to the Disney Ducks Universe). Dickie and her four close friends possibly are studying Journalism at some university of Duckburg, because of her clear connection to the reporter career, which was showed in various comic stories. Donald and his nephews never appeared in those stories with Dickie's teen gang.
Dickie Duck's first American appearance was in the Boom! Studios run of Uncle Scrooge, in the translation of the storyline "Around the World in 80 Bucks".Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Zio Paperone in vacanza con 80 dollari
Just like Moby, Dickie is also one of the few secondary characters who owns a small figurine in two different Italian collections by De Agostini.

===Dugan Duck===

Dugan Duck is Fethry Duck's nephew who is a little bit younger than Huey, Dewey and Louie. According to the Brazilian comic story "O Nascimento Do Biquinho",Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story O Nascimento Do Biquinho he is the first nephew of Fethry, being son of his sister, who lives in the periphery of Duckburg. Since Eider and Lulubelle, Fethry's official parents, apparently don't have a daughter, Dugan's mother could be a child from a previous union of Lulubelle.
Dugan originally owned yellow feathers, an uncommon characteristic for Disney Ducks given by his Brazilian creators, which was authorized by Disney Publishing Worldwide. He's a stubborn child whose most common activity is to cause troubles for his Uncle Fethry, who adopted Dugan after he and his girlfriend Gloria rescued him from a forest. Dugan's most frequent partner is usually a little pignose girl called Cintia, whose mother happens to be Fethry's neighbor and she really dislikes Dugan. He made a huge success in Brazil during the 1980s, when his charismatic figure was quite explored by Brazilian cartoonists, but he practically disappeared from the Brazilian comics in the next decade. Some Italian cartoonists have been used Dugan once in a while, but he just appears with white feathers in Italian comics.

===Belle Duck===

Belle Duck is a plus-sized, tall and elegant duck lady. She appeared for the first time in "Belle Corners The Coin Collection" with drawings by the cartoonist Al Hubbard.Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Belle Corners The Coin Collection In this story, Scrooge meets Belle again  40 years after their last meeting. He tells to his grandnephews Huey, Dewey and Louie before her arrival at his house that she was the most charming girl of her town, being daughter of a tycoon who lived in a mansion. But later Belle reveals that now a riverboat called "The Gilded Lily" is everything that she can own, since she spent all her inheritance money. Scrooge cannot hide his surprise at seeing his old crush's look after all those years when they finally meet each other in the story. Tony Strobl was the American cartoonist who most frequently drew this character, despite Hubbard was the cartoonist who first drew her.  Belle is an independent, self-assured, generous and warm-hearted woman, and Huey, Dewey and Louie Duck adore her. She also has a joyful personality and she loves to give parties on her riverboat by using Scrooge's money. Borrowing money from Scrooge is generally the first thing that Belle thinks of when she intends to reform "The Gilded Lily" or to buy a new piece of machinery for it. She often shows a daring behavior towards Scrooge, like in "The Return of Belle Duck" by Strobl,Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story The Return of Belle Duck where Scrooge asks her about what they will talk about and she answers, "Me and you, honey! Your money... and how I'm going to spend it!".
In "Go West, Young Duck" by Dick Kinney and Tony Strobl,Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Go West, Young Duck Belle tells the story of a European ancestor of her called Christina Duck who tried to find America in 1492, which is the same year that Christopher Columbus reached this continent in the Atlantic Ocean, previously unknown to Middle-Age Europeans. Curiously, Donald Duck also owns an ancestor on father's side who would have been a contemporary of Columbus, a character named Colombust Duck who is mentioned in another story drawn by Strobl, "The Family Tree Spree".
Thus far, Belle Duck's latest appearance was in the Danish story "Riverboat Rovers" by Lars Jensen and José Ramon Bernardo.Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Riverboat Rovers

===Hustler Duck===

Hustler Duck is an obscure character created by Dick Kinney & Al Hubbard that works as a marketing man. The American cartoonists who most frequently used this character were Jim Fletcher and Vivie Risto, despite Hubbard was the cartoonist who was credited for co-creating him. Hustler is funnily annoying and he wears big round glasses, just like John Rockerduck. He is always ready to sell his services in different professional areas to Uncle Scrooge McDuck in most of his oldest stories. After almost ten years withoug being used in comic stories, Hustler appeared in two Brazilian ones firstly published in 1975. His last appearance was in a Brazilian story from 1991.Coa-Inducks - Index to Hustler Duck stories
It was never suggested in comic stories that Hustler Duck is somehow related to Donald Duck. In the comic story "A Star is Born",Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story A Star Is Born Hustler calls an aunt of him, asking her to reunite many relatives of them both in the film studio that Scrooge recently acquired. The name of this aunt isn't revealed.

===Upsy Duck===

Upsy Duck is Donald's uncle from the 1965 story "Mastering The Matterhorn",Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Mastering The Matterhorn illustrated by Tony Strobl. In the first panel of its second page, one of Donald's triplet nephews mentions that Upsy was their great uncle. According to this story, he gained the nickname "Upsy" because he was a great mountain climber. Donald clearly refers to Upsy Duck as his uncle on the fourth page of this comic story. He says in the first panel of this page, "But Uncle Upsy didn't give up easily!". Since Quackmore, Daphne and Eider are the only children of Grandpa Duck (Humperdink Duck) and Grandma Duck (Elvira Coot), according to Don Rosa, Upsy may be considered as a son of Humperdink before marrying Elvira, who would be his second wife. In this case, Humperdink probably would be some years older than her.
On the Internet, Upsy was for a long time known only from his appearance on a German Duck family tree,[tpl]cite web|author=Gilles Maurice |url=http://goofy313g.free.fr/calisota_online/trees/ducktrees/germanic.html |title=The Germanic Line of Duck Family Trees |publisher=Goofy313g.free.fr |date= |accessdate=2010-07-06[/tpl]  where he was called Gipfel Duck and considered as Fethry Duck's brother.

===Sheriff Dan Duck===

Sheriff Dan Duck (aka Cousin Dan) is an old cousin of Donald who happens to be sheriff of a Western town called Bent Spur Gulch. Dan originally has thick, dark-grey eyebrows, a long, dark-grey mustache and long, dark-grey hair on the left and right sides of his head. He is generally shown holding a crutch. He appeared in two comic stories, "Daredevil Deputy" by Jack Bradbury,Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Daredevil Deputy where he asks Donald to replace him while he recovers from "a touch of rheumatism",  and "Trigger Gulch Gang" by Tony Strobl,Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Trigger Gulch Gang where he has only a brief appearance on the first page.

===Dudly D. Duck===

Dudly D. Duck is a cousin of Donald who appears in the comic story "Why All the Crabby Ducks?" by Vic Lockman and Mike Arens.Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Why All the Crabby Ducks? He is a flopped architect and inventor who was responsible for the construction of the "Jog Tunnel", which annoys the citizens of Duckburg because it really has a jog in it, and for the bad planning of Duckburg's streets. Therefore, Dudly became very unpopular and was forced to live isolated in a lonely street, including his name was forgotten until the day that Donald discovers who planned the "Jog Tunnel", and then his girlfriend Daisy Duck reveals who is Dudly Duck through the newspaper where she works as reporter. A reporter rival of Daisy ends up discovering that Dudly is related to Donald, who in turn becomes unpopular too.
Dudly appears in a Brazilian comic story where Fethry Duck works as reporter of Scrooge's newspaper, the Duckburg Chronicle, and he intends to interview Dudly, who is returning to Duckburg. He also had a cameo appearance in another Brazilian comic story where Gyro Gearloose is called by the Mayor of Duckburg (a dogface version) to fix a sinking building planned by Dudly. Actually, this building originally appeared in "Why All the Crabby Ducks?".

===Nancy Duck===

Nancy Duck is a female cousin on father's side of Donald. She's a girl with glasses and brown hair who is freakily obsessed with taking pictures of people. She appears in the comic story "A Likely Story" by Bob Gregory,Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story A Likely Story where Daisy Duck thinks that Donald is having a romantic meeting with a glamorous and beautiful actress who is also called Nancy Duck in his own home. Like Upsy and Dim-Witty Duck, Nancy also tends to keep her eyes half-opened.

===Dexter Duck===

Dexter Duck is an anthropomorphic duck who, like Gladstone Gander, contests with Donald Duck to get Daisy Duck's attention. At first glance, Dexter can get confused with Gladstone, but he is actually quite different from Gladstone, since the format of his eyes is the same of Donald's ones and his hair is frizzy, while Gladstone's one is curly. Besides, Dexter is a little bit fat, unlike Gladstone. Their respective clothes aren't also similar. Gladstone wears a blue/green jacket, a black/red bow tie and a fedora hat. Dexter in turn wears a purple blouse, a clear green bow tie and a pork pie hat, and he doesn't wear spats.
Dexter Duck appeared in one only story thus far, "Double Date" by Tony Strobl,Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Double Date where he plays dirty to beat Donald and conquer Daisy. It's not suggested that Dexter is related to Donald in this story, despite they share the same surname.

===Phooey Duck===

Phooey Duck is the fourth nephew of Donald Duck and lost brother of Huey, Dewey, and Louie. He is not really a character, he is the fourth nephew drawn by accident in the Donald Duck comic. He has been named Phooey by Disney comic editor Bob Foster. The name is originally a term which, sometimes spelled phooie or fooey, expresses dislike, chagrin or disappointment, and is frequently used by Donald and his relatives.
There are many instances where Phooey appears. Some, however, are not really true appearances, but rather some other Junior Woodchuck, who looks like the three nephews.
One short Egmont-licensed Disney comic written by Lars Jensen explained Phooey's sporadic appearances as a freak incident of nature.
In one Saint Patrick's Day comic book adventure, Phooey appears as a Leprechaun or Guardian Angel in disguise as a duckling.

==Ludwig Von Drake==

==Toys in the Duck Family==

===Sparky the Lion===

Sparky the Lion is Donald Duck's stuffed lion who only appears in the Mickey Mouse Clubhouse episode, Donald's Lost Lion.

==Coot Kin==

The surname "Coot" had been used on several ducks by various artists, usually for characters who were relatives of Donald Duck but were not part of the Duck family or the Clan McDuck. When Don Rosa created his Duck Family Tree in 1993, he included the Coots used by Carl Barks and himself as Grandma Duck's family are descendants of Cornelius Coot. It was Rosa's idea to use Coot as Grandma's maiden name, and to have Cornelius Coot as an ancestor of Donald.

===Cornelius Coot===

Cornelius Coot is the founder of Duckburg and Toontown Fair (according to a statue in the land at the Magic Kingdom), and Donald Duck's great-great-grandfather. He first appeared as a statue in Walt Disney's Comics and Stories #138 in the 1952 story "Statuesque Spendthrifts" by Carl Barks. His statue and legacy has later appeared in many stories.
Although Cornelius was a well-known figure to readers of Disney comics, his character history was not told until Don Rosa began using the character in the late 1980s. The following history is mainly based on Rosa's stories, especially "His Majesty, McDuck", first published in Uncle Scrooge Adventures #14.
Cornelius Coot (1790–1880) was born in 1790 as an American citizen. His ancestors had been in America for quite some time and his roots are believed to reach to the colonization of Jamestown, Virginia (1607) and the voyage of the Mayflower (1620). But he is the first member of the Coot Kin to gain prominence. His birthplace is unknown and before reaching Duckburg he lived the life of a wandering hunter. He apparently had travelled all the way from the East to the West coast making his living by trading furs from the animals he killed.
He arrived at Fort Drake Borough, a British military base in Calisota, in 1818. He was apparently only looking for some trading with the soldiers but his life took some unexpected turns. During his stay the Fort was attacked by Spanish Troops from neighbouring California (the fictional Calisota includes parts historically belonging to Northern California. The Duck's version of California only includes the historical Southern California). The small British garrison couldn't defend the Fort and decided to retreat. In order to save face the commander made a deal with young Cornelius. The Fort would pass into his possession and if the Spanish managed to conquer it, he and his troops had nothing to do with the failure other than trusting an insane American to guard. Cornelius agreed. After the escape of the British he managed to frighten the Spanish away by making them believe that British reinforcements were approaching by popping some sweetcorn. (His statue depicts this fact.) The abandoned Fort was now Cornelius' and he had big plans for it.
He renamed it Fort Duckburg and turned it into a trading camp for hunters. Soon enough, some of them began to settle down and start their own families. Cornelius started his own farm and started acting as the leader of the new settlement. Pretty soon, a village was flourishing in Duckburg. Calisota was annexed into the new independent state of Mexico in 1821 but Duckburg acted much as a city state. It had its own laws, its own leaders and thanks to Cornelius its own defense force. Cornelius organized the citizens that could carry weapons into the Woodchuck Militia, a force that would guard the territory from any threat, including any conflicts with the Native Americans of the area. Cornelius turned the old Fort into the militia's base. He personally supervised the repairs to the Fort and had the idea to build underground tunnels under the Fort so that even during a siege they could still move in and out of the Fort. Besides the tunnel they made, they found an already existing one, the tunnel built by Fenton Penworthy and his men in 1579 after the building of the Fort. Cornelius explored the tunnel. He found the body of the long-dead Fenton and gave him a proper burial. He also found the info on the Guardians of the Lost Library. He found and kept the book written by Fenton and containing the secret knowledge of the Guardians. Apparently he appointed himself the next Guardian, the first after Fenton.
Cornelius had managed to pipe mountain water into the village. He was a capable leader and managed to improve his settlers' relationships with the Native Americans over time and Cornelius himself married an Native American woman. They had their only known son Clinton Coot in 1830. Throughout the rest of his life Cornelius continued to act as Duckburg's unofficial leader. Even when Calisota and neighbouring California were annexed to the USA in 1848 nothing truly changed in Duckburg. When Cornelius died in 1880, aged 90, he was a very respected family man but over time he has been honored by the citizens of Duckburg as the "father" of the city. The old hunter has gained legendary status in Calisota.
A statue of Cornelius holding an ear of corn is present in Mickey's Toontown Fair in Walt Disney World's Magic Kingdom. Prior to 1996, the land was known as Mickey's Birthdayland/Starland, and was set in the city of Duckburg.

===Clinton Coot===

Clinton Coot was first mentioned in Uncle Scrooge Adventures #27 in the story "Guardians of the Lost Library", first published in July, 1994. There he was introduced as the son of Cornelius Coot and the founder of The Junior Woodchucks, inspired by the book given to him by his father. However, there is a Junior Woodchucks story called "Right is Might",Coa Inducks - Page to the comic story Right is Might first published in Huey, Dewey and Louie Junior Woodchucks #1 on 1966, where one of Donald's triplet nephews sees a big picture adorning a camping tent and recognizes the figure in the picture as being a certain Pioneer O'Duck, described by one of them as "beloved founder of the Junior Woodchuck movement".
In The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck it is revealed that he is the father of Grandma Duck. In Don Rosa's Duck Family Tree, Clinton is married to Gertrude Gadwall and their two children are Grandma Duck (Elvira Coot) and Casey Coot.
According to Rosa's timelines, Clinton Coot was born in 1830, and died in 1910, aged 80.[tpl]cite web |url=http://stp.ling.uu.se/~starback/dcml/creators/rosa-on-himself.html#dates |title=Birth And Death Dates Of The Ducks, Coots And McDucks |accessdate=2007-11-25 |author=Rosa, Don |work=Don Rosa on himself |authorlink=Don Rosa[/tpl]
He is named after Bill Clinton, who was running for President of the United States when Don Rosa created the character.[tpl]cite web |url=http://personal.sdf.bellsouth.net/d/a/danshane/scroopage/los294_1.htm |title= The Life and Times of $crooge McDuck - Episode 10 |accessdate=2007-11-25 |author=Rosa, Don |work=The Life and Times of $crooge McDuck |quote=I wrote this story during the last presidential election. That explains why Grandma Duck's father is named Clinton Coot. |authorlink= Don Rosa[/tpl]

===Gertrude Gadwall===

Gertrude Gadwall is the wife of Clinton Coot, mother of Elvira Coot (also known as Grandma Duck) and Casey Coot, grandmother of Quackmore Duck, Daphne Duck, Eider Duck, Cuthbert Coot and Fanny Coot, great-grandmother of Donald Duck, Della Duck, Gladstone Gander, Abner Duck, Fethry Duck, Gus Goose and possibly Kildare Coot, and finally great-great-grandmother of Huey, Dewey and Louie and possibly Dugan Duck.

===Casey Coot===

Casey Coot first appeared in "Last Sled to Dawson", first published in June, 1988. He is introduced as an unsuccessful gold prospector and friend of Scrooge McDuck during his years in Klondike. In need of money he sold to the significantly more successful Scrooge McDuck his share in Duckburg, Calisota, USA. His share included "Killmule Hill" which renamed to "Killmotor Hill" comprises the land where Scrooge's money bin stands on. He later appeared in The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck Part 8 and Hearts of the Yukon. In The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck Part 10 it is revealed that he and Grandma Duck are brother and sister.
In Don Rosa's Duck Family Tree he is featured as a grandson of Cornelius Coot, a son of Clinton Coot and his wife Gertrude Gadwall. According to the tree he was married to Gretchen Grebe and they had at least two kids named Fanny Coot and Cuthbert Coot. He is also the grandfather of Gus Goose. It's interesting to note that Donald has one granduncle on father's side, Casey, and one uncle on mother's side, Scrooge, that are close in age. It has been suggested that he is also the grandfather of Kildare Coot although Rosa has not used the latter in his stories or tree.
According to Don Rosa's unofficial timelines, Casey Coot was born in 1860 and died sometimes before 1970.

===Gretchen Grebe===

Gretchen Grebe is  the wife of Casey Coot, mother of Cuthbert Coot and Fanny Coot and grandmother of Gus Goose. It has also been suggested that she is the grandmother of Kildare Coot.

===Fanny Coot===

Fanny Coot  is the mother of Donald's cousin Gus Goose and she was first mentioned in the Donald Duck comic strip of May 9, 1938 by Bob Karp & Al Taliaferro where Gus first appeared. But Gus's mother's surname wasn't revealed in this comic strip, where she identifies herself in a letter to Donald as Aunt Fanny.Coa Inducks - Excerpt of the Sunday comic strip YD 38-05-09 as published in 'Donald Duck 287' (Gladstone) So she was originally sister of one of Donald's parents. In Don Rosa's Duck Family Tree she is featured as a daughter of Casey Coot and his wife Gretchen Grebe,  and so a niece of Elvira Coot, Donald's paternal grandmother, and first cousin of Donald's father, Quackmore Duck. It's possible to consider that Quackmore had a high regard for his cousin Fanny, and for this reason Donald was taught to treat her as aunt. Fanny also had a brother named Cuthbert Coot and she married Luke the Goose,  and then became the mother of Gus Goose.

===Luke the Goose===

Luke the Goose is the father of Gus Goose.
He was originally supposed to be Gladstone Gander's father,Carl Barks's Duck Family Tree'The Duck Family Tree' - Genealogy by Carl Barks Daphne Duck's husband and Gus's uncle, but Carl Barks later changed his mind about that matter, making Goosetave Gander (who was originally Gladstone's adoptive father after Luke and Daphne "overate at a free-lunch picnic") Gladstone's biological father and Daphne's husband. Luke the Goose disappeared from the tree.
When Don Rosa created his Duck Family Tree, he used Luke Goose (removing the "the" in his name) and made him the husband of Fanny Coot and Gus Goose's father.

===Cuthbert Coot===

Cuthbert Coot was introduced in the story "Webfooted Wrangler," first published in April 1945, as a distant cousin of Donald Duck and a rancher. In Don Rosa's Duck family tree he is included as a member of the Coot Kin and more specifically as son of Casey Coot and his wife Gretchen Grebe, which makes him a nephew of Elvira Coot, a brother of Fanny Coot, a first cousin of Quackmore Duck, a first cousin once removed of Donald Duck and an uncle of Gus Goose.

===Gus Goose===

Gus Goose is Donald Duck's second cousin, and the great-nephew of Grandma Duck.
Gus's main personality trait is being quite gluttonous, as Donald discovered the hard way when Gus came for a visit in Gus' first appearance, the 1939 animated short Donald's Cousin Gus.
Within the Disney comics, Gus is usually shown as living on Grandma Duck's farm outside of Duckburg, where he works as her farmhand. Along with his gluttony, Gus is shown in the comics as being quite lazy, often doing little if any work on Grandma's farm. He also has a tendency of falling asleep at random occasions, sometimes even standing up.
Gus made no appearances in DuckTales, but there is a background character in the series, Vacation Van Honk, who looks very much like Gus.
Recently, Gus Goose appeared in the 2000s animated series Disney's House of Mouse, as the club's gluttonous chef, speaking only in honks rather than words. He also made non-speaking cameo appearances in both Mickey's Christmas Carol and Who Framed Roger Rabbit.
The friend and neighbor Gustav Goose from Quack Pack is probably not the same as Cousin Gus since there are very few similarities (aside from the name and general size of the character). Some confusion is also caused by the German comicbook version of Gladstone Gander being referred to as "Gustav Gans" ("Gustav Goose").
Gus Goose has appeared as boyfriend of a classy and rich anthropomorphic swan called Cissy Swann in Danish stories.Coa Inducks - Index to stories with Cissy Swann In Italy, a nephew of him called Pepper already appeared in two comic stories.Coa Inducks - Index to stories with Pepper Neither of those ones reveal who is the parent of Pepper that is blood-related to Gus.

===Kildare Coot===

Kildare Coot  was introduced by artist Romano Scarpa as a highly eccentric fourth cousin of Donald Duck in the story "Sgrizzo, il papero più balzano del mondo" (roughly translated as "Kildare Coot, the weirdest duck in the world"), first published on October 25, 1964. Though his exact relationship to Donald remains uncertain his last name suggests he belongs to the Coot Kin and that he is related to Donald through Elvira Coot, Donald's paternal grandmother. Curiously, Kildare usually treats Gideon McDuck, Scrooge's half-brother, as his uncle. He calls Gideon 'Zio', which means uncle in Italian.Coa Inducks - Excerpt of the comic story La grande corsa Paperopoli-Ocopoli Kildare and his fellow Andy Ascott (original Italian name) appear as reporters of Gideon's newspaper, The Cricket, in some Italian stories.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


