[[Polyeidos]]

CATEGORIES: Greek mythology, Mythological Greek seers

In Greek mythology, Polyeidos or Polyidus (Greek, "seeing many things"), son of Coeranus, was a famous seer from Corinth.

==Genealogy==

Polyeidos was a descendant of another renowned seer, Melampus. Given that Melampus had two sons, Abas and Mantius, different sources made Coeranus, father of Polyeidos, son or grandson of either of the two. Briefly, the two alternate lineages were:
According to a scholiast on Homer' s Iliad, Polyeidos had two sons, Euchenor and Cleitus, by Eurydameia, daughter of Phyleus. Pausanias makes Polyeidus father of Coeranus, Manto and Astycrateia, and calls Euchenor his grandson through Coeranus.

==Polyeidos and Glaucus==

The best known myth concerning Polyeidos is the one that deals with him saving the life of Glaucus, which runs as follows.Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheca 3.3.1-.2Hyginus, Fabulae 136. One day, Glaucus, son of King Minos and Queen Pasiphaë of Crete, was playing with a mouse and suddenly disappeared. The Kuretes told Minos: "A marvelous creature has been born amongst you: whoever finds the true likeness for this creature will also find the child."
They interpreted this to refer to a newborn calf in Minos' herd.  Three times a day, the calf changed color from white to red to black. Polyeidos observed the similarity to the ripening of the fruit of the mulberry or the blackberry, and Minos sent him to find Glaucus.
Searching for the boy, Polyeidos saw an owl driving bees away from a wine-cellar in Minos' palace.  Inside the wine-cellar was a cask of honey, with Glaucus dead inside.  Minos demanded Glaucus be brought back to life and shut Polyeidos up in the wine-cellar with a sword. When a snake appeared nearby, Polyeidos killed it with the sword.  Another snake came for the first, and after seeing its mate dead, the second serpent left and returned with an herb which then brought the first snake back to life. With the herb Polyeidos resurrected the child.
Minos refused to let Polyeidos leave Crete until he taught Glaucus the art of divination.  Polyeidos did so, but then, at the last second before leaving, he asked Glaucus to spit in his mouth.  Glaucus did so and forgot everything he had been taught.
The story of Polyeidos and Glaucus was the subject of a lost play of Euripides, his Bellerophon, and of one by Aeschylus, and Sophocles' lost The Mantises.

==Other stories==

It is related that Polyeidos advised Bellerophon as to how to find and tame Pegasus, in order to kill the Chimera.Scholia on Pindar, Olympian Ode 13. 75
Polyeidos was said to have come to Megara to purify Alcathous, son of Pelops, for the accidental murder of the latter's son Callipolis. The tomb of his two daughters was shown at Megara.
Polyeidos also appears in one of the stories collected in Pseudo-Plutarch's On Rivers: he explains to Lysippe, mother of Teuthras, the source of her son's insanity.Pseudo-Plutarch, On Rivers, 21. 4

==Notes==

==External links==


