</ref> It has also appeared in numerous anthologies, starting with ''Poets and Poetry of America'' edited by [[Rufus Wilmot Griswold]] in 1847.
The immediate success of "The Raven" prompted Wiley and Putnam to publish a collection of Poe's prose called Tales in June 1845; it was his first book in five years.Meyers, 177 They also published a collection of his poetry called The Raven and Other Poems on November 19 by Wiley and Putnam which included a dedication to Barrett as "the Noblest of her Sex".Thomas & Jackson, 591 The small volume, his first book of poetry in 14 years,Peeples, 136 was 100 pages and sold for 31 cents.Silverman, 299 In addition to the title poem, it included "The Valley of Unrest", "Bridal Ballad", "The City in the Sea", "Eulalie", "The Conqueror Worm", "The Haunted Palace" and eleven others.Sova, 209 In the preface, Poe referred to them as "trifles" which had been altered without his permission as they made "the rounds of the press".

===Illustrators===

Later publications of "The Raven" included artwork by well-known illustrators. Notably, in 1858 "The Raven" appeared in a British Poe anthology with illustrations by John Tenniel, the Alice in Wonderland illustrator (The Poetical Works of Edgar Allan Poe: With Original Memoir, London: Sampson Low). "The Raven" was published independently with lavish woodcuts by Gustave Doré in 1884 (New York: Harper & Brothers). Doré died before its publication.Scholnick, Robert J. "In Defense of Beauty: Stedman and the Recognition of Poe in America, 1880–1910", collected in Poe and His Times: The Artist and His Milieu, edited by Benjamin Franklin Fisher IV. Baltimore: The Edgar Allan Poe Society, 1990. p. 262. ISBN 0-9616449-2-3 In 1875, a French edition with English and French text, Le Corbeau,  was published with lithographs by Édouard Manet and translation by the Symbolist Stéphane Mallarmé.[ref]
</ref>
Many 20th-century artists and contemporary illustrators created artworks and illustrations based on "The Raven", including Edmund Dulac, István Orosz,[ref]
—Anamorphic illustration for "The Raven"</ref><ref>
—the same illustration with a chrome-plated brass cylinder</ref> and Ryan Price.<ref>
</ref>

==Composition==

Poe capitalized on the success of "The Raven" by following it up with his essay "The Philosophy of Composition" (1846), in which he detailed the poem's creation. His description of its writing is probably exaggerated, though the essay serves as an important overview of Poe's literary theory.Krutch, 98 He explains that every component of the poem is based on logic: the raven enters the chamber to avoid a storm (the "midnight dreary" in the "bleak December"), and its perch on a pallid white bust was to create visual contrast against the dark black bird. No aspect of the poem was an accident, he claims, but is based on total control by the author.Silverman, 295–296 Even the term "Nevermore", he says, is used because of the effect created by the long vowel sounds (though Poe may have been inspired to use the word by the works of Lord Byron or Henry Wadsworth LongfellowForsythe, 439–452). Poe had experimented with the long o sound throughout many other poems: "no more" in "Silence", "evermore" in "The Conqueror Worm". The topic itself, Poe says, was chosen because "the death... of a beautiful woman is unquestionably the most poetical topic in the world." Told from "the lips ... of a bereaved lover" is best suited to achieve the desired effect. Beyond the poetics of it, the lost Lenore may have been inspired by events in Poe's own life as well, either to the early loss of his mother, Eliza Poe, or the long illness endured by his wife, Virginia. Ultimately, Poe considered "The Raven" an experiment to "suit at once the popular and critical taste", accessible to both the mainstream and high literary worlds. It is unknown how long Poe worked on "The Raven"; speculation ranges from a single day to ten years. Poe recited a poem believed to be an early version with an alternate ending of "The Raven" in 1843 in Saratoga, New York. An early draft may have featured an owl.Weiss, 185

==Critical reception==

In part due to its dual printing, "The Raven" made Edgar Allan Poe a household name almost immediately,Hoffman, 80 and turned Poe into a national celebrity.Peeples, 133 Readers began to identify poem with poet, earning Poe the nickname "The Raven".Silverman, 238 The poem was soon widely reprinted, imitated, and parodied. Though it made Poe popular in his day, it did not bring him significant financial success.Krutch, 155 As he later lamented, "I have made no money. I am as poor now as ever I was in my life – except in hope, which is by no means bankable".
The New World said, "Everyone reads the Poem and praises it ... justly, we think, for it seems to us full of originality and power." The Pennsylvania Inquirer reprinted it with the heading "A Beautiful Poem". Elizabeth Barrett wrote to Poe, "Your 'Raven' has produced a sensation, a fit o' horror, here in England. Some of my friends are taken by the fear of it and some by the music. I hear of persons haunted by 'Nevermore'."Krutch, 153 Poe's popularity resulted in invitations to recite "The Raven" and to lecture – in public and at private social gatherings. At one literary salon, a guest noted, "to hear Poe repeat the Raven ... is an event in one's life."Silverman, 279 It was recalled by someone who experienced it, "He would turn down the lamps till the room was almost dark, then standing in the center of the apartment he would recite ... in the most melodious of voices ... So marvelous was his power as a reader that the auditors would be afraid to draw breath lest the enchanted spell be broken."Krutch, 154 Parodies sprung up especially in Boston, New York, and Philadelphia and included "The Craven" by "Poh!", "The Gazelle", "The Whippoorwill", and "The Turkey". One parody, "The Pole-Cat", caught the attention of Andrew Johnston, a lawyer who sent it on to Abraham Lincoln. Though Lincoln admitted he had "several hearty laughs", he had not, at that point read "The Raven".Thomas & Jackson, 635 However, Lincoln eventually read and memorized the poem.Basler, Roy P. and Carl Sandberg. Abraham Lincoln: his speeches and writings. New York: De Capo Press, 2001: 185. ISBN 0-306-81075-1.
"The Raven" was praised by fellow writers William Gilmore Simms and Margaret Fuller,Meyers, 184 though it was denounced by William Butler Yeats, who called it "insincere and vulgar ... its execution a rhythmical trick". Transcendentalist Ralph Waldo Emerson said, "I see nothing in it."Silverman, 265 A critic for the Southern Quarterly Review wrote in July 1848 that the poem was ruined by "a wild and unbridled extravagance" and that minor things like a rapping at the door and a fluttering curtain would only affect "a child who had been frightened to the verge of idiocy by terrible ghost stories".Thomas & Jackson, 739 An anonymous writer going by the pseudonym "Outis" suggested in the Evening Mirror that "The Raven" was plagiarized from a poem called "The Bird of the Dream" by an unnamed author. The writer showed 18 similarities between the poems and was made as a response to Poe's accusations of plagiarism against Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. It has been suggested Outis was really Cornelius Conway Felton, if not Poe himself.Moss, 169 After Poe's death, his friend Thomas Holley Chivers said "The Raven" was plagiarized from one of his poems.Moss, 101 In particular, he claimed to have been the inspiration for the meter of the poem as well as the refrain "nevermore".Parks, Edd Winfield. Ante-Bellum Southern Literary Critics. Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 1962: 182.
"The Raven" has influenced many modern works, including Vladimir Nabokov's Lolita in 1955, Bernard Malamud's "The Jewbird" in 1963 and Ray Bradbury's "The Parrot Who Knew Papa" in 1976.Kopley & Hayes, 196 The process by which Poe composed "The Raven" influenced a number of French authors and composers, such as Charles Baudelaire and Maurice Ravel, and it has been suggested that Ravel's Boléro may have been deeply influenced by the "The Philosophy of Composition."Lanford, 243–265. The poem is additionally referenced throughout popular culture in films, television, music, and video games.

==See also==

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==

Text
Commentary
Illustrated
Audio

