[[Giants (Greek mythology)]]

CATEGORIES: Greek legendary creatures, Greek mythology, Gigantes, Offspring of Gaia

In Greek mythology,  the Giants or Gigantes (Greek: Γίγαντες, Gigantes, singular Gigas) were a race of great strength and aggression, though not necessarily of great size, known for the Gigantomachy, their battle with the Olympian gods, who were unable to defeat the Giants without the aid of the hero Heracles.Hansen, pp. 177–179; Gantz, pp. 445–454. According to Hesiod, the Giants were the children of Gaia (Earth) and her husband  Uranus (Sky), born from the blood that fell upon Gaia when Uranus was castrated by their son Cronus.Hesiod, Theogony 185. Hyginus gives Tartarus as the father of the Giants. A parallel to the Giants' birth is the birth of Aphrodite from the similarly fertilized sea.
Archaic and Classical representations always show the Giants as man-sized hoplites wearing armor, fully human in form.Gantz, pp. 446, 447. Later representations (after c. 380 BC) show Giants with snakes for legs.Gantz, p. 453; Hammond, "Giants". In later traditions, the Giants were often confused with the Titans and other opponents of the Olympians.
Giants, buried under the ground, were thought to be the cause of volcanic eruptions and earthquakes.See for example Philostratus, Life of Apollonius of Tyana 5.16; Philostratus of Lemnos?, Imagines 2.17.5; Claudian, Rape of Proserpine 1.154–159; Mayor p. 262.

==Origins==

The name "Gigantes" implies "earthborn",Hard, p. 86; Gantz, p.16; Merry, Homer's Odyssey 7.59. and Hesiod's Theogony makes this explicit by having the Giants be the offspring of Gaia (Earth). According to Hesiod, Gaia mating with Uranus bore many children: the first generation of Titans, the Cyclopes and the Hundred-Handers. But Uranus "hated" his children and, as soon as they were born, he imprisoned them inside of Gaia, causing her much distress. And so Gaia made a sickle of adamant which she gave to Cronus the youngest of her Titan sons, and hid him to wait in ambush. And when Uranus came to lie with Gaia, Cronus castrated his father, and "the bloody drops that gushed forth Gaia received, and as the seasons moved round she bore ... the great Giants."Hesiod, Theogony 173 ff. From these same drops of blood also came the Erinyes (Furies) and the Meliai (ash tree nymphs), while the severed genitals of Uranus falling into the sea resulted in a "white foam" from which Aphrodite "grew". The mythographer Apollodorus also has the Giants being the offspring of Gaia and Uranus, though he makes no connection with Uranus' castration, saying instead that Gaia "vexed on account of the Titans, brought forth the Giants".Apollodorus, 1.6.1; Hansen, p. 178.
Homer makes three brief mentions of Giants in the Odyssey, though it's not entirely clear that he and Hesiod understood the term to mean the same thing.Gantz, p. 446. Homer makes Giants among the ancestors of the Phaiakians, a race of men encountered by Odysseus in the Odyssey, saying that Alcinous, the ruler of the Phaiakians, was the son of Nausithous, who was the son of Poseidon and Periboia, the daughter of the giant Eurymedon.Homer, Odyssey 7.56–63. Alcaeus and Acusilaus make the Phaiakians, like the Giants, offspring of the castration of Uranus, Gantz, p. 16. Alcinous says that the Phaiakian, like the Cyclopes and the Giants, are "near kin" to the gods.Homer, Odyssey 7.199–207. And Odysseus describes the Laestrygonians as more like Giants than men.Homer, Odyssey 10.119–120. Pausanias, the 2nd century AD geographer, reads these lines of Homer to mean that, for Homer, the Giants were a race of mortal men.Pausanias, 8.29.1–4. Smith, "Gigantes" and Hammond, "Giants", following Pausanias, both assert that, for Homer, the Giants were a "savage race of men". For the mythographer Diodorus Siculus, the Giants were also a race of men, see 4.21.5, Gantz, p. 449.
The 6th–5th century lyric poet Bacchylides calls the Giants "sons of the Earth".Bacchylides, 15.63; Castriota, pp. 233–234. Later the term "gegeneis" ("earthborn") became a common epithet of the Giants."Gegeneis", Brills New Pauly; Crusius, p.93; Batrachomyomachia 7; Sophocles, Women of Trachis 1058; Euripides, The Phoenician Women 1131; Lycophron, Alexandra  126, 1408. Hyginus has the Giants being the offspring of Gaia and Tartarus.Hyginus, Fabulae  Preface.

==Confusion with Titans and others==

Though clearly distinct in early traditions, Hellenistic and later writers often confused the Giants and their Gigantomachy, with an earlier set of offspring of Gaia and Uranus, the Titans and their war with the Olympian gods, the Titanomachy.Smith, "Gigantes"; Gantz, p. 447; Hansen p. 178, Grimal, p. 171; Tripp, p. 250; Morford, pp. 82–83. A probable early confusion, (or at least a possible cause of later confusion) can be seen in Euripides' Iphigenia in Tauris 221–224 and Hecuba 466–474, see Torrance, p. 155, note 74. This confusion extended to other opponents of the Olympians, including the monster Typhon and the Aloadae, the gigantic brothers Otus and Ephialtes (though in the case of Ephialtes there was probably a Giant with the same name).Gantz, pp. 450–451. For example the first century Latin writer Hyginus, includes the names of several Titans: Coeus, Iapetus, and Astraeus, along with Typhon and the Aloadae, in his list of Giants,Hyginus, Fabulae  Preface. and Ovid, seems to conflate the Gigantomachy with the later siege of Olympus by the Aloadae.Hansen, p. 178; Ovid, Metamorphoses 1.151–162. See also Horace, Odes  3.4.42 ff., with Lyne p. 51.

==Descriptions==

Homer describes the Giant Eurymedon as μεγαλήτορος ("greathearted"),Homer, Odyssey 7.58; Liddell and Scott, μεγαλήτωρ. and his people as ὑπερθύμοισι ("overweening")Homer, Odyssey 7.59; Liddell and Scott, ὑπέρθυμος. and ἀτάσθαλος ("reckless, presumptuous, wicked").Homer, Odyssey 7.60; Liddell and Scott, ἀτάσθαλος. Hesiod calls the Giants κρατερῶν ("strong, stout, mighty")Hesiod, Theogony 50; Liddell and Scott κρατερός. and μεγάλους ("great")Hesiod, Theogony 185; Liddell and Scott, μέγας. which might  or might not be a reference to their size.Hansen, p. 177. Though a possible later addition, the Theogony'' also has the Giants born "with gleaming armour, holding long spears in their hands".Gantz, p. 446.
Bacchylides calls the Giants arrogant saying that they were destroyed by hybris.Bacchylides, 15.50 ff.; Castriota, p. 139, pp. 233–234. The seventh century BC lyric poet Alcman (fragment 1 PMGF) probably also used the Giants as an example of hybris (for which offense one might suffer the "vengeance of the gods")  saying "they suffered unforgettable punishments for the evil they did".Wilkinson, p. 142; Cairns, p. 310.
Homer's comparison of the Giants to the Laestrygonians is suggestive. The Laestrygonians, who "hurled ... rocks huge as a man could lift", certainly possessed great strength, and possibly great size, as their king's wife is described as being as big as a mountain.According to Gantz, p 446: "In all, the account rather suggests that the huge bulk of  Antiphates' wife is not typical of the Lastrygones as a whole. But they  are clearly thought of as good-sized, although whether it is in this respect that they are like the Gigantes and unlike men we cannot say; the Odysseys emphasis might be thought to fall more on their uncivilized behjavior"
Over time, descriptions of the Giants make them less human, more monstrous and more gigantic. According to Apollodorus the Giants had great size and strength, a frightening appearance, with long hair and beards and scaly feet.Apollodorus, 1.6.1. Ovid makes them "serpent-footed" with a "hundred arms",Ovid, Metamorphoses 1.185. and Nonnus has them  "serpent-haired".Nonnus ,  Dionysiaca 1.18.

==Gigantomachy==

The most important divine struggle in Greek mythology was the Gigantomachy, the battle fought between the Giants and the Olympian gods for supremacy of the cosmos.Moore, p. 21. It is primarily for this battle that the Giants are known.

===Early sources===

The references to the Gigantomachy in archaic sources are sparse.Gantz, p. 15. Neither Homer nor Hesiod mention anything about the Giants battling the gods.Gantz, p. 446.
Homer's remark that Eurymedon "brought destruction on his froward people" might possibly be a reference to the GigantomachyA scholion to Odyssey 7.59 asserts that Homer does not know that the Giants fought against the gods, Gantz, p. 447. and Hesiod's remark that Heracles performed a "great work among the immortals"Hesiod, Theogony 954; for the translation used here see Most 2006, p. 79. is probably a reference to Heracles' crucial role in the gods victory over the Giants.Gantz, p. 446. The Hesiodic Catalogue of Women (or the Ehoia) refers to Heracles having slain "presumptious Giants".Hesiod fragment 43a.65 MW, Most 2007, p. 143. Gantz, p. 446, says that this line "with no link to what precedes or follows, might easily be an interpolation". And another probable reference to the Gigantomachy in the Catalogue has Zeus produce Heracles to be "a protector against ruin for gods and men".Hesiod fragment 195.28–29 MW, Most 2007, p. 5; Gantz, p. 446.
There are indications that there might have been a lost work, a Gigantomachia, which gave an account of the war: Hesiod's Theogony says that the Muses sing of the Giants,Hesiod, Theogony 50–52. and the sixth century BC poet Xenophanes mentions the Gigantomachy as a subject to be avoided at table.Xenophanes, 1.21 (Lesher, pp. 12, 13); Gantz, p. 446. And in fact the Apollonius scholia says that in the "Gigantomachia" Cronus (as a horse) sires Chiron by matting with Philyra, but the scholiast may be confusing the Titans and Giants, since Chiron did apparently figure in a lost poem about the Titnanomachy and it is hard to imagine what role Chiron might have played in such a poem about the Gigantomachy.Gantz, p. 447.
The late sixth early fifth century BC lyric poet Pindar provides some of the earliest details of the battle. He locates the battle "on the plain of Phlegra" and has Teiresias foretell Heracles killing Giants "beneath his rushing arrows".Pindar, Nemean 1.67–69. He calls Heracles "you who subdued the Giants",Pindar, Nemean 7.90. and has Porphyrion, who he calls "the king of the Giants", being overcome by the bow of Apollo.Pindar, Pythian 8.12–18. Euripides' Heracles has its hero shooting Giants with arrows,Euripides, Heracles 177–180. and his Ion has the chorus describe seeing, on the late sixth century Temple of Apollo at Delphi, Athena fighting the Giant Enceladus with her "gorgon shield", Zeus burning the Giant Mimas with his "mighty thunderbolt, blazing at both ends", and Dionysus killing an unnamed Giant with his "ivy staff".Euripides, Ion 205–218.

===Apollodorus===

The most detailed account of the GigantomachyTripp, p. 252. is that of the mythographer Apollodorus.Apollodorus, 1.6.1–2. None of the early sources give any reasons for the war. Scholia to Iliad 14 mention the rape of Hera by the Giant Eurymedon (possibly the incident being referred to in Odyssey 7) and according to scholia to Pindar's Isthmian 6, it was the theft of the cattle of Helios by the Giant Alcyoneus that started the war.Gantz, pp. 419, 448–449.  But Apollodorus, who also mentions the theft of Helios' cattle by Alcyoneus, suggests a mother's revenge as the motive for the war, saying that Gaia bore the Giants because of her anger over the Titans (who had been vanquished and imprisoned by the Olympians).Gantz, p. 449; Grimal, p. 171; Tripp, p. 251. The  late 4th century AD Latin poet Claudian expands on this notion in his Gigantomachy 14 ff. with Gaia urging the Giants to war saying "Up, army of avengers, the hour is come at last, free the Titans from their chains; defend your mother." And seemingly, as soon as the Giants are born they begin hurling "rocks and burning oaks at the sky".Compare with Hesiod who seems to have the Giants born, like Athena and the Spartoi, fully grown and armed for battle.
There was a prophecy that the Giants could not be killed by the gods alone, but they could be killed with the help of a mortal.Compare with Pindar,  Nemean 1.67–69 (mentioned above) where Teiresias prophesies that Heracles will aid the gods in their battle with the Giants. Hearing this, Gaia sought for a certain plant (pharmakon) that would protect the Giants. But before Gaia or anyone else could find it, Zeus forbade Eos (Dawn), Selene (Moon) and Helios (Sun) to shine, and harvested all of the plant himself, then had Athena summon Heracles.
According to Apollodorus, Alcyoneus and Porphyrion were the two strongest Giants. Heracles shot Alcyoneus, who fell to the ground but then revived, for Alcyoneus was immortal within his native land. So Heracles, with Athena's advice, dragged him beyond the borders of that land, where Alcyoneus then died (compare with Antaeus).Antaeus, another offspring of Gaia who was an opponent of Heracles, was immortal as long as he was in contact with the earth. Heracles killed Antaeus by crushing him while holding him off the ground. Porphyrion attacked Heracles and Hera, but Zeus caused Porphyrion to become enamoured of Hera, whom Porphyrion then tried to rape, but Zeus struck Porphyrion with his thunderbolt and Heracles killed him with an arrow.As noted above Pindar has Apollo kill Porphyrion.
Other Giants and their fates are mentioned by Apollodorus. Ephialtes was blinded by an arrow from Apollo in his left eye, and another arrow from Heracles in his right. Eurytus was killed by Dionysus with his thyrsus, Clytius by Hecate with her torches, and Mimas, by Hephaestus with "missles of red-hot metal" from his forge.As noted above, Euripides has Zeus kill Mimas; other accounts have Mimas killed by Ares: Apollonius of Rhodes, Argonautica 3.1225 ff.; Claudian Gigantomachy 85 ff.. Athena crushed Enceladus under the Island of Sicily and flayed Pallas, using his skin as a shield. Poseidon broke off a piece of Kos called Nisyros, and threw it on top of Polybotes. (Strabo also relates the story of Polybotes buried under Nisyros, but adds that some say Polybotes lies under Kos instead.)Strabo, 10.5.16. Hermes, wearing Hades' helmet, killed Hippolytus, Artemis killed Gration, and the Moirai (Fates) killed Agrius and Thoas with bronze clubs. All the rest were "destroyed" by thunderbolts thrown by Zeus, with each Giant being shot with arrows by Heracles (as the prophecy seemingly required).

===Location===

Various places have been associated with the Giants and the Gigantomachy. As noted above Pindar has the battle occur at Phlegra ("the place of burning"),Singleton, p. 235. as do other early sources.Aeschylus, Eumenides 294; Euripides, Heracles 1192–1194; Aristophanes, The Birds 824; Apollonius of Rhodes, Argonautica 3.1225 ff.. See also Hesiod fragment 43a.65 MW (Most 2007, p. 143, Gantz, p. 446). Phlegra was said to be an ancient name for Pallene (modern Kassandra),[ref]Herodotus, 7.123.1; Strabo, 7 Fragment 25, 27;
