[[Level 7]]

CATEGORIES: 1959 novels, Dystopian novels, Fictional subterranea, Post-apocalyptic novels, 1950s science fiction novels

Level 7 is a 1959 science fiction novel by the American writer Mordecai Roshwald. It is told from the first person perspective (diary) of a modern soldier X-127 living in the underground military complex Level 7, where he is expected to reside permanently, fulfilling the role of commanding his nation's nuclear weapons.[tpl]cite book|last=Roshwald|first=Mordecai|title=Level 7|year=1959|publisher=University of Wisconsin Press|location=Madison, Wisconsin|isbn=978-0-299-20064-0[/tpl]

==Plot summary==

During his forced residence in a deep underground offensive-warfare complex, X-127 is ordered to push the bomb buttons to begin World War III (which lasts a total of 2 hours and 58 minutes). From that point, humanity's few civilian survivors move from the surface of the earth to a collection of underground shelter complexes on Levels 1 through 5, while military personnel already occupy the deepest and safest Levels 6 and 7. It later emerges that the orders given have been wholly automatic due to a launch on warning strategy,Brians, Paul (1987). Nuclear Holocausts: Atomic War in Fiction, chapter 2, Kent State University Press. Retrieved 17 March 2013. and the war has taken place as a series of electronic responses to an initial accident. 
X-127 and his fellow shelter inhabitants belatedly learn the criteria that had determined admission to the shelters: Civilians were granted only an illusion of protection, while government officials and military personnel were granted significantly more security. Those who were assigned to launch the nuclear missiles, and their support staff, were selected for their ability to behave like machines,Doherty, Trevor J. (2009). Future Hell: Nuclear Fiction in Pursuit of History, Student Pulse, 1(11):5. Retrieved 17 March 2013. yet are counted upon to preserve the human spirit and rebuild the human race. X-127 and his colleagues attempt to carry on human life, but discover that institutions such as marriage and preparations for child-rearing have been hollowed out by conditions and attitudes in the antiseptic underground.
Toward the end of the novel, the inhabitants of the surviving shelters gradually meet their deaths as radioactive surface contamination makes its way down past air filters and into water sources in the ground. As Level 7's safety falls into question, its inhabitants confront their isolation, overconfidence in technology, loneliness below a dead world, and the insanity of a society whose momentum toward annihilation exceeded its collective will to live. 
At last, the inhabitants of "Level 7" are exterminated through a malfunction in their nuclear power pile.

==Structure==

The book is apparently written in such a way to discourage the reader from determining which side is which. References to democracy are structured as to be just as applicable to Soviet democracy as to British or American democracy. The book contains no geographical references or individual names, but does use non-metric measurements. It is left to the individual reader to determine if this indeed identifies a Western setting or merely reflects the author's background. In any case, specific national identities are arguably irrelevant to the book's themes of dehumanization, the abstraction of nuclear warfare, and the danger that this leads to when combined with the destructive potential of the weapons involved. The novel thus acts as a warning against the nuclear arms race, as the original (but later removed) postscript makes clear:
Originally the manuscript contained a preface by Martian archaeologists, who discover the diary amongst the ruins of a destroyed Earth. However, this was removed in editions published before 2003 because it was felt that it spoiled the ending of the book.
Level 7 was adapted by J. B. Priestley for a 1966 episode of the BBC2 television science-fiction drama programme Out of the Unknown.

==References==

==See also==


