[[Æthelnoth (archbishop of Canterbury)]]

CATEGORIES: 1038 deaths, West Saxon saints, Kentish saints, Archbishops of Canterbury, 11th-century archbishops, 11th-century Christian saints, Year of birth unknown, Place of birth unknown, Deans of Canterbury

[tpl]About|the 11th-century archbishop||Æthelnoth (disambiguation)[tpl]![/tpl]Æthelnoth[/tpl]

Æthelnoth (also Ethelnoth, Ednoth, or Eadnodus; died 1038) was a medieval Archbishop of Canterbury. Descended from an earlier English king, Æthelnoth became a monk prior to becoming archbishop. While archbishop, he travelled to Rome and brought back saint's relics. He consecrated a number of other bishops who came from outside his archdiocese, leading to some friction with other archbishops. Although he was regarded as a saint after his death, there is little evidence of his veneration or of a cult in Canterbury or elsewhere.

==Early life==

Æthelnoth was a son of the Æthelmær the Stout and a grandson of Æthelweard the Historian, who was a great-great-grandson of Æthelred I. In the view of the historian Frank Barlow, Æthelnoth was probably the uncle of Godwin of Wessex.Barlow The Godwins p. 21 He was baptised by Dunstan, and a story was told at Glastonbury Abbey that as the infant was baptised, his hand made a motion much like that an archbishop makes when blessing. From this motion, Dunstan is said to have prophesied that Æthelnoth would become an archbishop.Mason "Æthelnoth (d. 1038)" Oxford Dictionary of National Biography
Æthelnoth became a monk at Glastonbury, then was made dean of the monastery of Christ Church Priory, at Canterbury, the cathedral chapter for the diocese of Canterbury.Knowles, et al. Heads of Religious Houses p. 33 He was also a chaplain to King Cnut of England and Denmark as well as Dean of Canterbury when on 13 November 1020 Æthelnoth was consecrated as Archbishop of Canterbury.Fryde, et al. Handbook of British Chronology p. 214 Æthelnoth's elevation probably was a gesture of appeasement, as Æthelnoth's brother Æthelweard had been executed in 1017 by Cnut, who also banished a brother-in-law named Æthelweard in 1020. A later story stated that Cnut favoured Æthelnoth because Æthelnoth had bestowed chrism on the king. This may be a garbled account of Æthelnoth's participation in Cnut's confirmation as a Christian in 1016 or his coronation in 1017. There are some indications that he was a student of Ælfric of Eynsham, the homilist.Barlow English Church 1000–1066 pp. 72–73

==Archbishop of Canterbury==

In 1022 Æthelnoth went to Rome to obtain the pallium,Ortenberg "Anglo-Saxon Church and the Papacy" English Church and the Papacy p. 49 and was received by Pope Benedict VIII. On his return trip, he bought a relic of St Augustine of Hippo for 100 silver talents and one gold talent. He gave the relic to Coventry Abbey.Smith, et al. "Court and Piety" Catholic Historical Review p. 575 He also presided over the translation of the relics of Ælfheah, his predecessor at Canterbury who was regarded as a martyr and saint.Brooks Early History of the Church of Canterbury pp. 290–298 In 1022 Æthelnoth consecrated Gerbrand as bishop for the Diocese of Roskilde,Stenton Anglo-Saxon England p. 463 which was in Scandinavia. The archbishop of Hamburg-Bremen was the metropolitan of Roskilde, and the fact that Gerbrand was consecrated by an English archbishop later caused friction between the bishop and his metropolitan. Cnut was forced to concede that in the future he would not appoint bishops in Bremen's archdiocese without the metropolitan's advice. A later tradition held that Æthelnoth consecrated two Welsh bishops, one at Llandaff and one at St. David's.Barlow English Church 1000–1066 pp. 232–234
The medieval chronicler William of Malmesbury praised Æthelnoth's wisdom. A story of doubtful authenticity tells how he refused to crown King Harold Harefoot,O'Brien Queen Emma and the Vikings pp. 167–168 as he had promised Cnut to crown none but a son of the king by his wife, Emma.

==Death and legacy==

Æthelnoth died in 1038, on either 28 October, 29 October,Walsh A New Dictionary of Saints p. 184 30 October, or 1 November. Prior to his death, some of his episcopal functions were performed by a royal priest, Eadsige. He was buried in Canterbury Cathedral. He is considered a saint, with a feast day of 30 October. While he is listed in Jean Mabillon's Lives of the Benedictine Saints and in the Acta Sanctorum, there is no contemporary or later evidence of a cult being paid to him at Canterbury or elsewhere.Farmer Oxford Dictionary of Saints p. 181

==Citations==

==References==

==External links==


