[[President of the People's Republic of China]]

CATEGORIES: Presidents of the People's Republic of China, China politics-related lists, 1954 establishments in China, 1975 disestablishments, 1982 establishments in China

The President of the People's Republic of China (PRC) is the titular head of state of China. The presidency is a largely ceremonial office, with limited powers.[tpl]efn|The office of the President is a prestigious one. The President is the Head of the State. The Constitution of 1982 restores powers and functions of the President of the People's Republic of China and recognizes him as the Head of the State. But he is not the real executive like the American President but only a ceremonial Head. He can be compared with the Indian President or King/Queen of England.Krishna Kanta Handique State Open University, EXECUTIVE: THE PRESIDENT OF THE CHINESE REPUBLIC.[/tpl] It is classified as a state organ rather than an administrative post.It is listed as such in the current Constitution; it is thus equivalent to organs such as the State Council, rather than offices such as Premier.
The office was first established in the PRC Constitution of 1954. It was abolished under the Constitution of 1975, then reinstated in the Constitution of 1982, but with reduced powers. The official PRC translation of the title was originally 'State Chairman'; after 1982, it was changed to 'President'. This is the translation now used in most English-language news reports.
The current President is Xi Jinping, who also holds the positions of General Secretary of the Communist Party of China and Chairman of the Central Military Commission, making him China's paramount leader.[tpl]efn|Xi Jinping, 59, was named general secretary of the 82- million member Communist Party and is set to take over the presidency, a mostly ceremonial post, from Hu Jintao in March.Who’s Who in China’s New Communist Party Leadership Lineup - Bloomberg[/tpl]

==Qualifications and election==

According to the current Constitution of the People's Republic of China, the President must be a Chinese citizen with full electoral rights who has reached the age of 45. The President's term of office is the same as the term of the National People's Congress (currently five years), and the president and vice-president are both limited to two consecutive terms.Constitution of the People's Republic of China, Section 2, Article 79.
The President is elected by the National People's Congress (NPC), China's highest state body, which also has the power to remove the President and other state officers from office. Elections and removals are decided by a simple majority vote.Constitution of the People's Republic of China, Articles 62, 63.
According to the Organic Law of the NPC, the President is nominated by the NPC Presidium, the Congress's executive organ.[tpl]Cite web|title = Organic Law of the National People's Congress of the PRC|accessdate = 2013-07-03|url = http://www.china.org.cn/english/government/207281.htm Article 13[/tpl] In practice, however, the ruling Communist Party of China reserves the post of President for its current General Secretary. Like all officers of state elected by the NPC, the President is elected from a one name ballot.
In the event that the office of President falls vacant, the Vice-President succeeds to the office. In the event that both offices fall vacant, the Chairman of the NPC Standing Committee temporarily acts as President until the NPC can elect a new President and Vice-President.Constitution of the People's Republic of China, Article 84.

==Powers and duties==

Under the current PRC constitution, the President's most important political power is to nominate the Premier of the People's Republic of China.Constitution of the People's Republic of China, Article 62, Section 5. The NPC does no itself have the power to nominate the Premier. The NPC votes on the nomination, but since only one name is on the ballot, it can only approve or reject. To date, it has never rejected a personnel nomination. Since the Premier, the head of government in China, is the most important political appointment in the Chinese government, the nomination power, under some circumstances, may give the President real political influence.

==Figurehead==

Once the NPC has approved the Premier, the President then issues his official appointment. As head of government, the Premier has the power to appoint the entire State Council of the People's Republic of China, subject to NPC approval. The President then issues the appointments for the Vice-Premiers, State Council members and Ministers for all departments.
In addition to nominating the Premier, the President also has the power to promulgate statutes, confer state medals and titles, issue pardons, proclaim war, and issue mobilization orders. However, since the President exercises these powers in accordance with the decisions of the NPC or its Standing Committee, and is not empowered to reject any of these measures, these are formal powers only.Constitution of the People's Republic of China, Article 81.
The President has similar duties in foreign affairs, including appointment and recall of representatives abroad, and ratification and abrogation of treaties and agreements concluded with foreign states. The President exercises these powers in accordance with the decisions of the Standing Committee of the NPC, so that these are also formal powers only.Constitution of the People's Republic of China, Article 82.

==History==

The office of State Chairman (the original English translation, as noted above) was first established under China's 1954 Constitution. The ceremonial powers of the office were largely identical to those in the current Constitution.Constitution of the People's Republic of China, 1954, Articles 40-42.
The powers of the 1954 office differed from those of the current office in two areas: military and governmental. The State Chairman's military powers were defined in the 1954 Constitution as follows: "The Chairman of the People's Republic of China commands the armed forces of the state, and is Chairman of the National Defence Council ([tpl]lang-zh|国防委员会[/tpl])."Constitution of the People's Republic of China, Article 43. The Council of National Defence was unique to the 1954 Constitution.  It was abolished under the 1975 Constitution.
The State Chairman's governmental powers were definted in the 1954 Constitution as follows: "The Chairman of the People's Republic of China, whenever necessary, convenes a Supreme State Conference ([tpl]lang-zh|最高国务会议[/tpl]) and acts as its chairman."  The members of the Supreme State Conference included the main officers of state, and its views were to be presented to the main organs of state and government, including the National People's Congress and the State Council. Council of National Defence.Constitution of the People's Republic of China, Article 44. The Supreme State Conference was also unique to the 1954 Constitution. It was abolished under the 1975 Constitution and later Constitutions have not included a similar body.
As Chairman of the Communist Party of China, Mao Zedong was elected State Chairman at the founding session of the National People's Congress. At the 2nd NPC in 1959, Mao was succeeded by Liu Shaoqi, first Vice Chairman of the Communist Party, in the position. Liu was reelected as State Chairman at the 3rd NPC in Jan 1965. However, in 1966, Mao launched the Cultural Revolution and by August 1966 Mao and his supporters succeeding in removing Liu from his position as party Vice Chairman. A few months later Liu was apparently placed under house arrest, and after a prolonged power struggle, on October 31, 1968, the 12th Plenum of the 8th Communist Party Congress stripped Liu Shaoqi of all his party and non-party position, including that of State Chairman.  This was in violation of the Constitution, which required a vote by the NPC to remove the State Chairman. In fact, during the Cultural Revolution the NPC itself ceased to operate; the last meeting of its Standing Committee was on July 7, 1966, when it voted to postpone its next session.Summary of the Decisions of the 33rd Meeting of the NPC Standing Committee  The NPC and its Standing Committee did not meet again until 1975, and during that period the office of State Chairman was vacant.
When the 4th NPC was convened in 1975, its main act was to adopt a new Constitution which eliminated the office of State Chairman and emphasized instead the leadership of the Communist Party over the state, including an article that made the Party Chairman Supreme Commander of the country's armed forces. The 5th NPC was convened two years early, in 1978, and a third Constitution was adopted, which also lacked the office of State Chairman.  A draft of a fourth Constitution was published in 1982, which was adopted without significant amendment at the 6th NPC in 1983, and as a result, the office of State Chairman of the PRC became that of President of the PRC as per the official English translation.
In this Constitution, the President was conceived of as a figurehead of state with actual state power resting in the hands of the General Secretary of the Communist Party and the Premier, and all three posts were designed to be held by separate people.  The President therefore held minor responsibilities such as greeting foreign dignitaries and signing the appointment of embassy staff, and did not intervene in the affairs of the State Council or the Party. In the original 1982 Constitution plan, the Party would develop policy, the state would execute it, and the power would be divided to prevent a cult of personality from forming as it did with the case of Mao Zedong. Thus in 1982, China perceivably had four main leaders: Hu Yaobang, the Party General Secretary; Zhao Ziyang, the Premier; Li Xiannian, the President; and Deng Xiaoping, the "Paramount Leader", holding title of the CMC Chairman and was overall commander-in-chief of the armed forces.
In the 1990s, the experiment of separating party and state posts, which led to conflict during the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, was terminated, and in 1993, the post of President was taken by Jiang Zemin, who as General Secretary of the Communist Party and Chairman of the Central Military Commission made the office of the President a powerful position. When Jiang Zemin stepped down in 2003, the offices of General Secretary and President were once again both given to one man, then Vice-President Hu Jintao, the first Vice President to assume the office.  In turn, Hu vacated both offices for Xi Jinping in 2012/13.

==List of presidents==

File:Mao.jpg|Mao Zedong 1st President (27 September 1954 - 27 April 1959)
File:LiuShaoqi Colour.jpg|Liu Shaoqi 2nd President (27 April 1959 - 31 October 1968)
File:Soong Ching-ling 1937.jpg|Song Qingling Acting President (31 October 1968 - 24 February 1972)
File:DONGBIWU.JPG|Dong Biwu Acting President (31 October 1968 - 17 January 1975)
File:Xiannian.jpg|Li Xiannian 3rd President (18 June 1983 - 8 April 1988)
File:Yang Shangkun.jpg|Yang Shangkun 4th President (8 April 1988 - 27 March 1993)
File:Jiang Zemin St. Petersburg2002.jpg|Jiang Zemin 5th President (27 March 1993 - 15 March 2003)
File:Hu Jintao Cannes2011.jpg|Hu Jintao 6th President (15 March 2003 - 14 March 2013)
File:Xi Jinping Mexico2013.jpg|Xi Jinping 7th President (since 14 March 2013)

File:Mao.jpg|Mao Zedong Chairman of the Central People's Government (1949-1954)
File:Chu De2.jpg|Zhu De Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (1975-1976)
File:Soong Ching-ling 1937.jpg|Song Qingling Acting Chairwoman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (1976-1978)
File:Ye Jianying.jpg|Ye Jianying Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (1978-1983)

==President's Spouse==

Since the first president, seven had a spouse during term of office.

==Living former presidents==

As of [tpl]Currentmonthname[/tpl] [tpl]CURRENTYEAR[/tpl], there are two living former presidents:

==See also==

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==


