[[William Schutz]]

CATEGORIES: American psychologists, University of California, Los Angeles alumni, Tufts University faculty, Harvard University faculty, University of California, Berkeley faculty, Yeshiva University faculty, University of Chicago people, People from Illinois, 1925 births, 2002 deaths

not to be confused with "Schulz" or "Schultz", see also William Schulz (disambiguation)
William Schutz (December 19, 1925 – November 9, 2002) was an American psychologist.Social Security Death Index Accessed June 19, 2009Los Angeles Times Obituary Accessed June 19, 2009
Schutz was born  in Chicago, Illinois. He practiced at the Esalen Institute in the 1960s. He later became the president of BConWSA International. He received his Ph.D. from UCLA. In the 1950s, he was part of the peer-group at the University of Chicago's Counseling Center that included Carl Rogers, Thomas Gordon, Abraham Maslow and Elias Porter. He taught at Tufts University, Harvard University, University of California, Berkeley and the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, and was chairman of the holistic studies department at Antioch University until 1983.
In 1958, Schutz introduced a theory of interpersonal relations he called Fundamental Interpersonal Relations Orientation (FIRO). According to the theory three dimensions of interpersonal relations were deemed to be necessary and sufficient to explain most human interaction: Inclusion, Control and Affection.  These dimensions have been used to assess group dynamics.  
Schutz also created FIRO-B, a measurement instrument with scales that assess the behavioral aspects of the three dimensions. His advancement of FIRO Theory beyond the FIRO-B tool was most obvious in the change of the "Affection" scale to the "Openness" scale in the "FIRO Element-B".  This change highlighted his newer theory that behavior comes from feelings ("FIRO Element-F") and the self-concept ("FIRO Element-S").  "Underlying the behavior of openness is the feeling of being likable or unlikeable, lovable or unlovable.  I find you likable if I like myself in your presence, if you create an atmosphere within which I like myself."
W. Schutz authored more than ten books and many articles. His work was influenced by Alexander Lowen, Ida Pauline Rolf and Moshe Feldenkrais. As a Bodytherapist he led encounter group workshops focussing on the underlying causes of illnesses and developing alternative body-centered cures. His books, "Profound Simplicity" and "The Truth Option," address this theme. He brought new approaches to Bodytherapy that integrated truth, choice (freedom), (self) responsibility, self-esteem, self-regard and honesty into his approach.
In his books you may find the concept of energycycles (e.g. Schutz 1979) which a person goes through or call for completion. The single steps of the energycycles are: motivation - prepare - act - feel.
Schutz died in Muir Beach, California.

==Writings==

==Notes==

==External links==


