[[USS Irene Forsyte (IX-93)]]

CATEGORIES: Q-ships of the United States Navy, Unclassified miscellaneous vessels of the United States Navy, Ships built in Nova Scotia, 1922 ships

USS ''Irene Forsyte'' (IX-93) was a three masted schooner originally built as MacLean Clan which was briefly converted to a Q-ship, of the United States Navy.

==In commercial service==

The three-masted schooner MacLean Clan was built in 1920 by MacLean Construction Company, Mahone Bay, Nova Scotia for H.W. Adams of Lunenburg, Nova Scotia. Built at the end of the era of three masted merchant schooners, she was one of two schooners built by MacLean construction in 1920, the other being the auxiliary tern schooner Cote Nord.Parker, Tom, Sails of the Maritimes: The Story of the Three and Four Masted Cargo Schooners of Atlantic Canada, McGraw-Hill-Ryerson, 1976 p. 192 Maclean Clan worked in the coastal trade into the 1930s. She had an auxiliary engine installed in 1926 and was sold and re-registered in Windsor, Nova Scotia in 1929."Clan MacLean" Parks Canada, Ship Information Database In the early 1930s she was purchased by Captain Thomas Antle. Renamed Irene Myrtle, the schooner barely survived the tough trade conditions of that time and was in poor condition by the end of the decade. Given a new lease on life by the increased shipping traffic provoked by the war, she served in the coal trade between New England and Nova Scotia into 1942. That summer, while the ship was loading coal at New London, Connecticut, Captain Antle died and the ship was eventually put up for sale.

==Acquired by the US Navy==

At this time, the U.S. Navy began looking for a smaller coastal vessel to serve as a Q-ship, complementing the larger decoy ships [tpl]USS|Big Horn|AO-45|2[/tpl], [tpl]USS|Asterion|AK-100|2[/tpl], and [tpl]USS|Atik|AK-101|2[/tpl]. Purchased on 16 November 1942, for about US$12,000, the schooner was renamed Irene Forsyte and given hull designation symbol IX-93 on 7 December. She was delivered to the Thames Shipyard of New London, Connecticut, for conversion. Fitted with new engines, quick-firing armament, as well as concealed radar and sonar equipment, the auxiliary was commissioned 26 August 1943, Lieutenant Commander Richard Parmenter in command.

==Service history==

Based on the experience of Q-ships during World War I, it was hoped Irene Forsyte, with her relatively heavy armament concealed, could lure German submarines into close quarters on the surface and sink them with gunfire. Success in the venture would require a good disguise. After a volunteer crew sailed the schooner from New London on 29 September 1943, she changed her name and flag to that of a Portuguese Grand Banks fishing schooner. The crew also further concealed the guns and altered her rigging and profile. The disguised Q-ship then stood southeast in hopes of encountering enemy submarines.
Originally, the Navy planned to use the vessel off the "Trinidad corner" where U-boats had congregated and where several schooners had been attacked. However, by the time she was ready for sea, the situation had changed and she was given orders to sail on or about 26 September for Recife, Brazil, along the Maury Track.
In the early morning hours of 4 October 1943, a dispatch from Irene Forsyte reported that she was hove to at approximately 38°N, 66°W (near Bermuda). The schooner's seams had opened during the course of a heavy storm and her pumps were just able to keep ahead of the flooding. The message further stated that the condition might become serious if the heavy weather continued; permission was requested to proceed to Bermuda for repairs. Commander-in-Chief, U.S. Atlantic Fleet (CINCLANT), ordered two tugs to proceed to the scene and render assistance. Later in the day, however, Irene Forsyte reported that no assistance was needed, that she was proceeding to Bermuda, The tugs were recalled. She anchored in Hamilton Sound, Bermuda, and was reconditioned.
Immediately a Board of Investigation convened to determine why the vessel had been permitted to go to sea in such obviously unseaworthy condition. In commenting on the report of the Naval Inspector General, Commander in Chief, United States Fleet (Cominch) wrote:
The schooner arrived New York 8 November 1943 and, after an inspection three days later, she was decommissioned 16 December. Transferred to the War Shipping Administration, she was used for a time on a loan basis by the Merchant Marine Cadet Corps as a training ship until returned to the Navy for disposal on 28 November 1944. Stricken from the Naval Vessel Register on 22 December 1944, the schooner was transferred to the Maritime Commission and eventually sold at public auction 18 October 1945.

==Fate==

Purchased by a Cuban shipping firm, she was renamed Santa Clara and served another six years in the island trade. The old schooner met her end off La Ceiba when, heavily laden, she ran into bad weather, took on water and sank on 21 December 1951.

==References==


