[[History of physics]]

CATEGORIES: History of physics

Physics (from Ancient Greek: φύσις physis "nature") is a branch of science that developed out of philosophy, and was thus referred to as natural philosophy until the late 19th century—a term describing a field of study concerned with "the workings of nature". Currently, physics is traditionally defined as the study of matter, energy, and the relation between them. Physics is, in some senses, the oldest and most basic pure science; its discoveries find applications throughout the natural sciences, since matter and energy are the basic constituents of the natural world. The other sciences are generally more limited in their scope and may be considered branches that have split off from physics to become sciences in their own right. Physics today may be divided loosely into classical physics and modern physics.

==Ancient history==

Elements of what became physics were drawn primarily from the fields of astronomy, optics, and mechanics, which were methodologically united through the study of geometry. These mathematical disciplines began in Antiquity with the Babylonians and with Hellenistic writers such as Archimedes and Ptolemy. Meanwhile, philosophy, including what was called "physics", focused on explanatory (rather than descriptive) schemes, largely developed around the Aristotelian idea of the four types of "causes".

===Ancient Greece===

The move towards a rational understanding of nature began at least since the Archaic period in Greece (650 – 480 BCE) with the Pre-Socratic philosophers.  The philosopher Thales of Miletus (7th and 6th centuries BCE), dubbed "the Father of Science" for refusing to accept various supernatural, religious or mythological explanations for natural phenomena, proclaimed that every event had a natural cause.Singer, C. This shift from ecclesiastical reasoning to scientific reasoning marked the beginning of scientific methodology.  A Short History of Science to the 19th Century.  Streeter Press, 2008. p. 35. Thales also made advancements in 580 BCE by suggesting that water is the basic element, experimenting with magnets and attraction to rubbed amber, and formulating the first cosmologies. Anaximander, famous for his proto-evolutionary theory, disputed the ideas of Thales and proposed that rather than water, a substance called apeiron was the building block of all matter. Heraclitus (around 500 BCE) proposed that the only basic law governing the universe was the principle of change and that nothing remains in the same state indefinitely. This observation made him one of the first scholars in ancient physics to address the role of time in the universe, one of the most important concepts even in the modern history of physics. The early physicist Leucippus (first half of 5th century BCE) adamantly opposed the idea of direct divine intervention in the universe, instead proposing that natural phenomena had a natural cause. Leucippus and his student, Democritus, were the first to develop the theory of atomism – the idea that everything is composed entirely of various imperishable, indivisible elements called atoms.
During the classical period in Greece (6th, 5th and 4th centuries BCE) and in Hellenistic times, natural philosophy slowly developed into an exciting and contentious field of study. Aristotle ([tpl]lang-el|Ἀριστοτέλης[/tpl], Aristotélēs) (384 – 322 BCE), a student of Plato, promoted the concept that observation of physical phenomena could ultimately lead to the discovery of the natural laws governing them. Aristotle's writings cover physics, metaphysics, poetry, theater, music, logic, rhetoric, linguistics, politics, government, ethics, biology and zoology. He wrote the first work which refers to that line of study as "Physics" – in the 4th century BC, Aristotle founded the system known as Aristotelian physics. He attempted to explain ideas such as motion (and gravity) with the theory of four elements. Aristotle believed that all matter was made up of aether, or some combination of four elements: earth, water, air, and fire. According to Aristotle, these four terrestrial elements are capable of inter-transformation and move toward their natural place, so a stone falls downward toward the center of the cosmos, but flames rise upward toward the circumference. Eventually, Aristotelian physics became enormously popular for many centuries in Europe, informing the scientific and scholastic developments of the Middle Ages. It remained the mainstream scientific paradigm in Europe until the time of Galileo Galilei and Isaac Newton.
Early in Classical Greece, that the earth is a sphere ("round"), was generally known by all, and around 240 BCE, Eratosthenes (276 – 194 BCE) accurately estimated its circumference. In contrast to Aristotle's geocentric views, Aristarchus of Samos ([tpl]lang-el|Ἀρίσταρχος[/tpl]; c. 310 – c. 230 BCE) presented an explicit argument for a heliocentric model of the solar system, placing the Sun, not the Earth, at the centre. Seleucus of Seleucia, a follower of the heliocentric theory of Aristarchus, stated that the Earth rotated around its own axis, which in turn revolved around the Sun. Though the arguments he used were lost, Plutarch stated that Seleucus was the first to prove the heliocentric system through reasoning.
thumb|180x|Greek mathematician Archimedes, famous for his ideas regarding fluid mechanics and buoyancyIn the 3rd century BCE, the Greek mathematician Archimedes of Syracuse ([tpl]lang-el|Ἀρχιμήδης[/tpl] (287 – 212 BCE)—generally considered to be the greatest mathematician of antiquity and one of the greatest of all time—laid the foundations of hydrostatics, statics and calculated the underlying mathematics of the lever. A leading scientist of classical antiquity, Archimedes also developed elaborate systems of pulleys to move large objects with a minimum of effort. The Archimedes' screw underpins modern hydroengineering, and his machines of war helped to hold back the armies of Rome in the First Punic War. Archimedes even tore apart the arguments of Aristotle and his metaphysics, pointing out that it was impossible to separate mathematics and nature and proved it by converting mathematical theories into practical inventions. Furthermore, in his work On Floating Bodies, around 250 BCE, Archimedes developed the law of buoyancy, also known as Archimedes' Principle. In mathematics, Archimedes used the method of exhaustion to calculate the area under the arc of a parabola with the summation of an infinite series, and gave a remarkably accurate approximation of pi. He also defined the spiral bearing his name, formulae for the volumes of surfaces of revolution and an ingenious system for expressing very large numbers. He also developed the principles of equilibrium states and centers of gravity, ideas that would influence the Islamic scholars, Galileo, and Newton.
Hipparchus (190 – 120 BCE), focusing on astronomy and mathematics, used sophisticated geometrical techniques to map the motion of the stars and planets, even predicting the times that solar eclipses would happen. In addition, he added calculations of the distance of the sun and moon from the Earth, based upon his improvements to the observational instruments used at that time. Another of the most famous of the early physicists was Ptolemy (90 – 168 CE), one of the leading minds during the time of the Roman Empire. Ptolemy was the author of several scientific treatises, at least three of which were of continuing importance to later Islamic and European science. The first is the astronomical treatise now known as the Almagest (in Greek, Ἡ Μεγάλη Σύνταξις, "The Great Treatise", originally Μαθηματικὴ Σύνταξις, "Mathematical Treatise"). The second is the Geography, which is a thorough discussion of the geographic knowledge of the Greco-Roman world.
Much of the accumulated knowledge of the ancient world was lost. Even of the works of the better known thinkers, few fragments survived. Although he wrote at least fourteen books, almost nothing of Hipparchus' direct work survived. Of the 150 reputed Aristotelian works, only 30 exist, and some of those are "little more than lecture notes".

===Muslim scientists===

During the period of time known as the Dark Ages (5th to 15th centuries), much scientific progress occurred in the Muslim world. The scientific research of the Islamic scientists is often overlooked due to the conflict of the Crusades and "it's possible, too, that many scholars in the Renaissance later downplayed or even disguised their connection to the Middle East for both political and religious reasons."[tpl]cite web|url=http://www.cosmosmagazine.com/news/3924/ancient-arabic-scientists?page=0%2C1 |title=Top 10 ancient Arabic scientists |publisher=COSMOS magazine |date=2011-01-06 |accessdate=2013-04-20[/tpl] The Islamic Abbasid caliphs gathered many classic works of antiquity and had them translated into Arabic within the House of Wisdom in Baghdad, Iraq. Islamic philosophers such as Al-Kindi (Alkindus), Al-Farabi (Alpharabius), and Averroes (Ibn Rushd) reinterpreted Greek thought in the context of their religion. Ibn Sina (980 – 1037), known by the Latin name Avicenna, was a medical researcher from Bukhara, Uzbekistan responsible for important contributions to the disciplines of physics, optics, philosophy and medicine. He is most famous for writing The Canon of Medicine, a text used to teach student doctors in Europe until the 1600s.
thumb|left|The Abbasid Caliphate at its height, in 830 CEImportant contributions were made by Ibn al-Haytham (965 – 1040), a mathematician from Basra, Iraq considered one of the founders of modern optics. Ptolemy and Aristotle theorised that light either shone from the eye to illuminate objects or that light emanated from objects themselves, whereas al-Haytham (known by the Latin name Alhazen) suggested that light travels to the eye in rays from different points on an object. The works of Ibn al-Haytham and Abū Rayhān Bīrūnī eventually passed on to Western Europe where they were studied by scholars such as Roger Bacon and Witelo.[tpl]Harvtxt|Glick|Livesey|Wallis|2005|pp=89–90[/tpl][ref]Mariam Rozhanskaya and I. S. Levinova (1996), "Statics", p. 642, in [tpl]Harvtxt|Rashed|Morelon|1996|pp=614–642[/tpl]:
[tpl]quote|"Arabic statics was an essential link in the progress of world science. It played an important part in the prehistory of classical mechanics in medieval Europe. Without it classical mechanics proper could probably not have been created."[/tpl][/ref] Omar Khayyám (1048–1131), a Persian scientist, calculated the length of a solar year to 10 decimal places and was only out by a fraction of a second when compared to our modern day calculations. He used this to compose a calendar considered more accurate than the Gregorian calendar that came along 500 years later. He is classified as one of the world's first great science communicators – he is said to have convinced a Sufi theologist that the world turns on an axis. Muḥammad ibn Jābir al-Ḥarrānī al-Battānī (858 – 929), from Harran, Turkey, further developed trigonometry (first conceptualised in Ancient Greece) as an independent branch of mathematics, developing relationships such as tanθ = sinθ / cosθ. His driving force was to obtain the ability to locate Mecca from any given geographical point – aiding in Muslim rituals such as burial and prayer, which require participants to face the holy city, as well as making the pilgrimage to Mecca (known as the hajj).
Furthermore, Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (1201–1274), an astronomer and mathematician from Baghdad, authored the Treasury of Astronomy, a remarkably accurate table of planetary movements that reformed the existing planetary model of Roman astronomer Ptolemy by describing a uniform circular motion of all planets in their orbits. This work led to the later discovery, by one of his students, that planets actually have an elliptical orbit. Copernicus later drew heavily on the work of al-Din al-Tusi and his students, but without acknowledgment. The gradual chipping away of the Ptolemaic system paved the way for the revolutionary idea that the Earth actually orbited the Sun (heliocentrism).  Jābir ibn Hayyān (721 – 815) was a chemist and alchemist from Iran who, in his quest to make gold from other metals, discovered strong acids such as sulphuric, hydrochloric and nitric acids. He was the also first person to identify the only substance that can dissolve gold – aqua regis (royal water) – a volatile mix of hydrochloric and nitric acid. It is disputed whether Jabir was the first to use or describe distillation, but he was definitely the first to perform it in the lab using an alembic (from 'al-inbiq'). The most famous Persian mathematician is considered to be Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī (780–850), who produced a comprehensive guide to the numbering system developed from the Brahmi system in India, using only 10 digits (0–9, the so-called "Arabic numerals"). Al-Khwarizmi also used the word algebra ('al-jabr') to describe the mathematical operations he introduced, such as balancing equations, which helped in several problems.

===Medieval years===

Awareness of ancient works re-entered the West through translations from Arabic to Latin. Their re-introduction, combined with Judeo-Islamic theological commentaries, had a great influence on Medieval philosophers such as Thomas Aquinas. Scholastic European scholars, who sought to reconcile the philosophy of the ancient classical philosophers with Christian theology, proclaimed Aristotle the greatest thinker of the ancient world. In cases where they didn't directly contradict the Bible, Aristotelian physics became the foundation for the physical explanations of the European Churches.
Based on Aristotelian physics, Scholastic physics described things as moving according to their essential nature. Celestial objects were described as moving in circles, because perfect circular motion was considered an innate property of objects that existed in the uncorrupted realm of the celestial spheres. The theory of impetus, the ancestor to the concepts of inertia and momentum, was developed along similar lines by medieval philosophers such as John Philoponus and Jean Buridan. Motions below the lunar sphere were seen as imperfect, and thus could not be expected to exhibit consistent motion.  More idealized motion in the "sublunary" realm could only be achieved through artifice, and prior to the 17th century, many did not view artificial experiments as a valid means of learning about the natural world.  Physical explanations in the sublunary realm revolved around tendencies.  Stones contained the element earth, and earthy objects tended to move in a straight line toward the centre of the earth (and the universe in the Aristotelian geocentric view) unless otherwise prevented from doing so.[tpl]Refimprove section|date=June 2013[/tpl]

===India and China===

Important physical and mathematical traditions also existed in ancient Chinese and Indian sciences.
In Indian philosophy, Kanada was the first to systematically develop a theory of atomism around 200 BCEOliver Leaman, Key Concepts in Eastern Philosophy. Routledge, 1999, page 269. though some authors have allotted him an earlier era in the 6th century BCE.[tpl]harvnb|Chattopadhyaya|1986|pp=169–70[/tpl][tpl]harvnb|Radhakrishnan|2006|p=202[/tpl] It was further elaborated by the Buddhist atomists Dharmakirti and Dignāga during the 1st millennium CE.(Stcherbatsky 1962 (1930). Vol. 1. P. 19) Pakudha Kaccayana, a 6th-century BCE Indian philosopher and contemporary of Gautama Buddha, had also propounded ideas about the atomic constitution of the material world. These philosophers believed that other elements (except ether) were physically palpable and hence comprised minuscule particles of matter. The last minuscule particle of matter that could not be subdivided further was termed Parmanu. These philosophers considered the atom to be indestructible and hence eternal. The Buddhists thought atoms to be minute objects unable to be seen to the naked eye that come into being and vanish in an instant. The Vaisheshika school of philosophers believed that an atom was a mere point in space. Indian theories about the atom are greatly abstract and enmeshed in philosophy as they were based on logic and not on personal experience or experimentation. In Indian astronomy, Aryabhata's Aryabhatiya (499 CE) proposed the Earth's rotation, while Nilakantha Somayaji (1444–1544) of the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics proposed a semi-heliocentric model resembling the Tychonic system.
The study of magnetism in Ancient China dates back to the 4th century BCE. (in the Book of the Devil Valley Master),Li Shu-hua, "Origine de la Boussole 11. Aimant et Boussole", Isis, Vol. 45, No. 2. (Jul., 1954), p.175 A main contributor to this field was Shen Kuo (1031–1095), a polymath scientist and statesman who was the first to describe the magnetic-needle compass used for navigation, as well as discovering the concept of true north. In optics, Shen Kuo independently developed a camera obscura.Joseph Needham, Volume 4, Part 1, 98.

==Scientific Revolution==

During the 16th and 17th centuries, a large advancement of scientific progress known as the Scientific Revolution took place in Europe. Dissatisfaction with older philosophical approaches had begun earlier and had produced other changes in society, such as the Protestant Reformation, but the revolution in science began when natural philosophers began to mount a sustained attack on the Scholastic philosophical program and supposed that mathematical descriptive schemes adopted from such fields as mechanics and astronomy could actually yield universally valid characterizations of motion and other concepts.

===Nicolaus Copernicus===

A great breakthrough in astronomy was made by Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543), who proposed in 1543 the heliocentric model of the solar system. This theory stated the Earth orbits around the Sun with other bodies in Earth's galaxy (a large group of stars and other bodies). This heliocentric theory contradicted the ideas of Greek-Egyptian astronomer Ptolemy (2nd century CE), who stated that the Earth is the center of the universe. The Ptolemaic system had been accepted for more than 1,400 years. In 270 BCE the Greek astronomer Aristarchus of Samos (c. 310 – c. 230 BCE) had suggested that the Earth revolves around the Sun, but Copernicus's concept was the first to be accepted as a valid scientific possibility. Copernicus's book, De revolutionibus orbium coelestium (On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres), published just before his death in 1543, is often regarded as the starting point of modern astronomy and the defining epiphany that began the scientific revolution. Having made the assumption that the Sun was at the center of the universe, Copernicus realized that calculating tables of planetary motion (mathematical charts that describe the movements of planets) was much easier and more accurate. Copernicus's new perspective—along with the accurate observations of Tycho Brahe—was used by German astronomer Johannes Kepler (1571–1630) to formulate laws regarding planetary motions that are still accepted today. Among Kepler's laws is the idea that planetary orbits are elliptical rather than perfect circles.

===Galileo Galilei===

The Italian mathematician, astronomer, and physicist Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) was the central figure in the Scientific Revolution and famous for his support for Copernianism, his astronomical discoveries, empirical experiments and his improvement of the telescope. As a mathematician, Galileo's role in the university culture of his era was subordinated to the three major topics of study: law, medicine, and theology (which was closely allied to philosophy).  Galileo, however, felt that the descriptive content of the technical disciplines warranted philosophical interest, particularly because mathematical analysis of astronomical observations—notably the radical analysis offered by astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus concerning the relative motions of the Sun, Earth, Moon, and planets—indicated that philosophers' statements about the nature of the universe could be shown to be in error.  Galileo also performed mechanical experiments, and insisted that motion itself—regardless of whether that motion was natural or artificial—had universally consistent characteristics that could be described mathematically.
Galileo's early studies at the University of Pisa were in medicine, but he was soon drawn to mathematics and physics. At the age of 19, in the cathedral of Pisa, he timed the oscillations of a swinging lamp by means of his pulse beats and found the time for each swing to be the same, no matter what the amplitude of the oscillation, thus discovering the isochronal nature of the pendulum, which he verified by experiment. Galileo soon became known through his invention of a hydrostatic balance and his treatise on the center of gravity of solid bodies. While teaching (1589–92) at the University of Pisa, he initiated his experiments concerning the laws of bodies in motion, which brought results so contradictory to the accepted teachings of Aristotle that strong antagonism was aroused. He found that bodies do not fall with velocities proportional to their weights. The famous story in which Galileo is said to have dropped weights from the Leaning Tower of Pisa is apocryphal, but he did find that the path of a projectile is a parabola, and he is credited with conclusions foreshadowing Newton's laws of motion (such as discovering the property of inertia). One of these is now known as Galilean relativity: essentially the first precisely formulated statement about properties of the spacetime beyond geometry of the three-dimensional space.
Galileo has been called the "Father of Modern Observational Astronomy",[tpl]Citation | title = A Short History of Science to the Nineteenth Century | first = Charles | last = Singer | year = 1941 | publisher = Clarendon Press | url = http://www.google.com.au/books?id=mPIgAAAAMAAJ&pgis=1 | postscript =  [/tpl] (page 217) the "father of modern physics",[tpl]Citation|last=Weidhorn|first=Manfred|title=The Person of the Millennium: The Unique Impact of Galileo on World History|year=2005|publisher=iUniverse|isbn=0-595-36877-8|page=155[/tpl] the "father of science", and "the Father of Modern Science".Finocchiaro (2007). Stephen Hawking says, "Galileo, perhaps more than any other single person, was responsible for the birth of modern science.""Galileo and the Birth of Modern Science, by Stephen Hawking, American Heritage's Invention & Technology, Spring 2009, Vol. 24, No. 1, p. 36 Galileo's support of the Earth revolving around the Sun was controversial, as most people believed in the geocentric model or the Tychonic system. He was tried by the Inquisition, found "vehemently suspect of heresy", forced to recant, and spent the rest of his life under house arrest.
The contributions  that Galileo made to observational astronomy include the telescopic confirmation of the phases of Venus, the 1609 discovery of the four largest satellites of Jupiter (named the Galilean moons in his honour), and the observation and analysis of sunspots. Galileo also worked in applied science and technology, inventing an improved military compass and other instruments. Galileo used his telescopic discovery of the moons of Jupiter, as published in his Sidereus Nuncius in 1610, to procure a position in the Medici court with the dual title of mathematician and philosopher.  As a court philosopher, he was expected to engage in debates with philosophers in the Aristotelian tradition, and received a large audience for his own publications, such as The Assayer and Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Concerning Two New Sciences, which was published abroad after he was placed under house arrest for his publication of Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems in 1632.[tpl]Harvtxt|Drake|1978[/tpl][tpl]Harvtxt|Biagioli|1993[/tpl] Galileo's interest in the mechanical experimentation and mathematical description in motion established a new natural philosophical tradition focused on experimentation.  This tradition, combining with the non-mathematical emphasis on the collection of "experimental histories" by philosophical reformists such as William Gilbert and Francis Bacon, drew a significant following in the years leading up to and following Galileo's death, including Evangelista Torricelli and the participants in the Accademia del Cimento in Italy; Marin Mersenne and Blaise Pascal in France; Christiaan Huygens in the Netherlands; and Robert Hooke and Robert Boyle in England.

===René Descartes===

The French philosopher René Descartes (1596–1650) was well-connected to, and influential within, the experimental philosophy networks of the day. Descartes had a more ambitious agenda, however, which was geared toward replacing the Scholastic philosophical tradition altogether. Questioning the reality interpreted through the senses, Descartes sought to re-establish philosophical explanatory schemes by reducing all perceived phenomena to being attributable to the motion of an invisible sea of "corpuscles". (Notably, he reserved human thought and God from his scheme, holding these to be separate from the physical universe). In proposing this philosophical framework, Descartes supposed that different kinds of motion, such as that of planets versus that of terrestrial objects, were not fundamentally different, but were merely different manifestations of an endless chain of corpuscular motions obeying universal principles. Particularly influential were his explanations for circular astronomical motions in terms of the vortex motion of corpuscles in space (Descartes argued, in accord with the beliefs, if not the methods, of the Scholastics, that a vacuum could not exist), and his explanation of gravity in terms of corpuscles pushing objects downward.[tpl]Harvtxt|Shea|1991[/tpl][tpl]Harvtxt|Garber|1992[/tpl][tpl]Harvtxt|Gaukroger|2002[/tpl]
Descartes, like Galileo, was convinced of the importance of mathematical explanation, and he and his followers were key figures in the development of mathematics and geometry in the 17th century. Cartesian mathematical descriptions of motion held that all mathematical formulations had to be justifiable in terms of direct physical action, a position held by Huygens and the German philosopher Gottfried Leibniz, who, while following in the Cartesian tradition, developed his own philosophical alternative to Scholasticism, which he outlined in his 1714 work, The Monadology. Descartes has been dubbed the 'Father of Modern Philosophy', and much subsequent Western philosophy is a response to his writings, which are studied closely to this day. In particular, his Meditations on First Philosophy continues to be a standard text at most university philosophy departments. Descartes' influence in mathematics is equally apparent; the Cartesian coordinate system — allowing algebraic equations to be expressed as geometric shapes in a two-dimensional coordinate system — was named after him. He is credited as the father of analytical geometry, the bridge between algebra and geometry, important to the discovery of infinitesimal calculus and analysis.

===Sir Isaac Newton===

The late 17th and early 18th centuries saw the achievements of the greatest figure of the Scientific Revolution: Cambridge University physicist and mathematician Sir Isaac Newton (1642-1727), considered by many to be the greatest and most influential scientist who ever lived. Newton, a fellow of the Royal Society of England, combined his own discoveries in mechanics and astronomy to earlier ones to create a single system for describing the workings of the universe. Newton formulated three laws of motion and the law of universal gravitation, the latter of which could be used to explain the behavior not only of falling bodies on the earth but also planets and other celestial bodies in the heavens. To arrive at his results, Newton invented one form of an entirely new branch of mathematics: infinitesimal calculus (also invented independently by Gottfried Leibniz), which was to become an essential tool in much of the later development in most branches of physics. Newton's findings were set forth in his Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica (Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy), the publication of which in 1687 marked the beginning of the modern period of mechanics and astronomy.
Newton was able to refute the Cartesian mechanical tradition that all motions should be explained with respect to the immediate force exerted by corpuscles. Using his three laws of motion and law of universal gravitation, Newton removed the idea that objects followed paths determined by natural shapes and instead demonstrated that not only regularly observed paths, but all the future motions of any body could be deduced mathematically based on knowledge of their existing motion, their mass, and the forces acting upon them.  However, observed celestial motions did not precisely conform to a Newtonian treatment, and Newton, who was also deeply interested in theology, imagined that God intervened to ensure the continued stability of the solar system.
Newton's principles (but not his mathematical treatments) proved controversial with Continental philosophers, who found his lack of metaphysical explanation for movement and gravitation philosophically unacceptable. Beginning around 1700, a bitter rift opened between the Continental and British philosophical traditions, which were stoked by heated, ongoing, and viciously personal disputes between the followers of Newton and Leibniz concerning priority over the analytical techniques of infinitesimal calculus, which each had developed independently. Initially, the Cartesian and Leibnizian traditions prevailed on the Continent (leading to the dominance of the Leibnizian calculus notation everywhere except Britain).  Newton himself remained privately disturbed at the lack of a philosophical understanding of gravitation, while insisting in his writings that none was necessary to infer its reality.  As the 18th century progressed, Continental natural philosophers increasingly accepted the Newtonians' willingness to forgo ontological metaphysical explanations for mathematically described motions.[tpl]Harvtxt|Hall|1980[/tpl][tpl]Harvtxt|Bertolini Meli|1993[/tpl][tpl]Harvtxt|Guicciardini|1999[/tpl]
Newton built the first functioning reflecting telescope[tpl]vcite web|url=http://etoile.berkeley.edu/~jrg/TelescopeHistory/Early_Period.html|title=The Early Period (1608–1672)|accessdate=3 February 2009|publisher=James R. Graham's Home Page[/tpl] and developed a theory of color (published in his work Opticks) based on the observation that a prism decomposes white light into the many colours that form the visible spectrum. While Newton explained light as being composed of tiny particles, a rival theory of light which explained its behavior in terms of waves was presented in 1690 by Christiaan Huygens. However, the belief in the mechanistic philosophy together with the great weight of Newton's reputation was such that the wave theory gained relatively little support until the 19th century. Isaac Newton also formulated an empirical law of cooling and studied the speed of sound. He also demonstrated the generalised binomial theorem, developed Newton's method for approximating the roots of a function, and contributed to the study of power series. Newton's work on infinite series was inspired by Simon Stevin's decimals.[ref]
