[[Harmonic oscillator]]

CATEGORIES: Mechanical vibrations, Ordinary differential equations

In classical mechanics, a harmonic oscillator is a system that, when displaced from its equilibrium position, experiences a restoring force, F, proportional to the displacement, x:
where k is a positive constant.
If F is the only force acting on the system, the system is called a simple harmonic oscillator, and it undergoes simple harmonic motion: sinusoidal oscillations  about the equilibrium point, with a constant amplitude and a constant frequency (which does not depend on the amplitude).
If a frictional force (damping) proportional to the velocity is also present, the harmonic oscillator is described as a damped oscillator. Depending on the friction coefficient, the system can:
The boundary solution between an underdamped oscillator and an overdamped oscillator occurs at a particular value of the friction coefficient and is called "critically damped."
If an external time dependent force is present, the harmonic oscillator is described as a driven oscillator.
Mechanical examples include pendula (with small angles of displacement), masses connected to springs, and acoustical systems. Other analogous systems include electrical harmonic oscillators such as RLC circuits.  The harmonic oscillator model is very important in physics, because any mass subject to a force in stable equilibrium acts as a harmonic oscillator for small vibrations.  Harmonic oscillators occur widely in nature and are exploited in many manmade devices, such as clocks and radio circuits.  They are the source of virtually all sinusoidal vibrations and waves.

==Simple harmonic oscillator==

A simple harmonic oscillator is an oscillator that is neither driven nor damped. It consists of a mass m, which experiences a single force, F, which pulls the mass in the direction of the point x=0 and depends only on the mass's position x and a constant k. Balance of forces (Newton's second law) for the system is
Solving this differential equation, we find that the motion is described by the function
where 
The motion is periodic, repeating itself in a sinusoidal fashion with constant amplitude, A. In addition to its amplitude, the motion of a simple harmonic oscillator is characterized by its period T, the time for a single oscillation or its frequency f = [tpl]frac|T[/tpl], the number of cycles per unit time. The position at a given time t also depends on the phase, φ, which determines the starting point on the sine wave. The period and frequency are determined by the size of the mass m and the force constant k, while the amplitude and phase are determined by the starting position and velocity.
The velocity and acceleration of a simple harmonic oscillator oscillate with the same frequency as the position but with shifted phases.  The velocity is maximum for zero displacement, while the acceleration is in the opposite direction as the displacement.
The potential energy stored in a simple harmonic oscillator at position x is

==Damped harmonic oscillator==

In real oscillators, friction, or damping, slows the motion of the system. Due to frictional force, the velocity decreases in proportion to the acting frictional force. While simple harmonic motion oscillates with only the restoring force acting on the system, damped harmonic motion experiences friction. In many vibrating systems the frictional force Ff can be modeled as being proportional to the velocity v of the object: [tpl]nowrap|1=Ff = −cv[/tpl], where c is called the viscous damping coefficient.
Balance of forces (Newton's second law) for damped harmonic oscillators is then
This is rewritten into the form
where 
The value of the damping ratio ζ critically determines the behavior of the system. A damped harmonic oscillator can be:
The Q factor of a damped oscillator is defined as 
== Driven harmonic oscillators == 
Driven harmonic oscillators are damped oscillators further affected by an externally applied force F(t).  
Newton's second law takes the form
It is usually rewritten into the form
This equation can be solved exactly for any driving force, using the solutions z(t) which satisfy the unforced equation:
and which can be expressed as damped sinusoidal oscillations,
in the case where ζ ≤ 1. The amplitude A and phase φ determine the behavior needed to match the initial conditions.

===Step input===

In the case ζ the solution is:
with phase φ given by
The time an oscillator needs to adapt to changed external conditions is of the order τ = 1/(ζω0). In physics, the adaptation is called relaxation, and τ is called the relaxation time.
In electrical engineering, a multiple of τ is called the settling time, i.e. the time necessary to ensure the signal is within a fixed departure from final value, typically within 10%. The term overshoot refers to the extent the maximum response exceeds final value, and undershoot refers to the extent the response falls below final value for times following the maximum response.

===Sinusoidal driving force===

