[[Cassander]]

CATEGORIES: 350 BC births, 297 BC deaths, Ancient Macedonian generals, Hellenistic generals, Macedonian monarchs, Regents of Macedon, Conspirators against Alexander the Great, Ancient Thessalonica, Deaths from edema, 3rd-century BC rulers, 4th-century BC rulers, 4th-century BC Greek people, 3rd-century BC Greek people, 4th-century BC Macedonians, 3rd-century BC Macedonians

Cassander (Greek: Κάσσανδρος Ἀντιπάτρου, Kassandros son of Antipatros; ca. 350 BC – 297 BC), was a Greek Hellenistic King of Ancient Macedon (305–297 BC), son of Antipater, and founder of the Antipatrid dynasty. He was the namesake of his paternal uncle, Cassander.

==Early history==

In his youth, Cassander was taught by the philosopher Aristotle at the Lyceum in Macedonia. He was educated alongside the Crown Prince in a group that included Hephaestion, Ptolemy and Lysimachus.Heckel, Who’s who in the age of Alexander the Great: prosopography of Alexander’s empire, p.153 His family were distant collateral relatives to the Argead dynasty.Ptolemaic Dynasty - Affiliated Lines: The Antipatrids
Cassander is first recorded as arriving at Alexander the Great’s court in Babylon in 323 BC, where he had been sent by his father, Antipater, most likely to help uphold Antipater’s regency in Macedon, although a later contemporary who was hostile to the Antipatrids suggested that Cassander had journeyed to the court to poison the King.Fox, Robin Lane. Alexander the Great. p469, 2004 Ed.
Whatever the truth of this suggestion, Cassander stood out amongst the diadochi in his hostility to Alexander's memory. As Cassander and the other diadochi struggled for power, Alexander IV, Roxana, and Alexander’s supposed illegitimate son Heracles were all executed on Cassander's orders, and a guarantee to Olympias to spare her life was not respected.Green, Peter. Alexander the Great and the Hellenistic Age. p38, 2007 Ed. Cassander's decision to restore Thebes, which had been destroyed under Alexander, was perceived at the time to be a snub to the deceased King.Green, Peter. Alexander the Great and the Hellenistic Age. p40-41, 2007 Ed. It was later even said that he could not pass a statue of Alexander without feeling faint. Cassander has been perceived to be ambitious and unscrupulous, and even members of his own family were estranged from him.Fox, Robin Lane. Alexander the Great, p475, 2004 Ed.

==Later history==

