</ref>  For the last three decades of her life, she lived in the New South Wales town of [[Braidwood, New South Wales|Braidwood]].<ref>[http://www.twofiresfestival.com/twofires/judith/ The Two Fires Festival]</ref>
With David Fleay, Kathleen McArthur and Brian Clouston, Judith Wright was a founding member and, from 1964 to 1976, President, of the Wildlife Preservation Society of Queensland. She was the second Australian to receive the Queen's Gold Medal for Poetry, in 1991.
In "In the Garden",Fiona Capp, "In the Garden" Fiona Capp revealed the story of the 25-year secret love affair between two of Australia's most well-known and well-loved public figures, "the famous poet-cum-activist" Judith Wright and "the distinguished yet down-to-earth statesman" H. C. "Nugget" Coombs.Sydney Morning Herald  She had moved to Braidwood in order to be closer to Coombs, who was based in Canberra.
She started to lose her hearing in her mid-20s, and became completely deaf by 1992.

==Poet and critic==

Judith Wright was the author of several collections of poetry, including The Moving Image, Woman to Man, The Gateway, The Two Fires, Birds, The Other Half, Magpies, Shadow, Hunting Snake  and much much more. She was a lover of nature too.
Her work is noted for a keen focus on the Australian environment, which began to gain prominence in Australian art in the years following World War II. She deals with the relationship between settlers, Indigenous Australians and the bush, among other themes. Wright's aesthetic centres on the relationship between mankind and the environment, which she views as the catalyst for poetic creation. Her images characteristically draw from the Australian flora and fauna, yet contain a mythic substrata that probes at the poetic process, limitations of language, and the correspondence between inner existence and objective reality.
Her poems have been translated into Italian, Japanese and Russian.

===Birds===

In 2003, the National Library of Australia published an expanded edition of Wright's collection titled Birds.McKinney (2004) p.7 Most of these poems were written in the 1950s when she was living on Tamborine Mountain in southeast Queensland. McKinney, Wright's daughter, writes that they were written at "a precious and dearly-won time of warmth and bounty to counterbalance at last what felt, in contrast, the chilly dearth and difficulty of her earlier years".McKinney (2004) p.8-9 McKinney goes on to say that "many of these poems have a newly relaxed, almost conversational tone and rhythm, an often humorous ease and an intimacy of voice that surely reflects the new intimacies and joys of her life".McKinney (2004) p.9 Despite the joy reflected in the poems, however, they also acknowledge "the experiences of cruelty, pain and death that are inseparable from the lives of birds as of humans ... and turn a sorrowing a clear-sighted gaze on the terrible damage we have done and continue to do to our world, even as we love it".

==Environmentalist and social activist==

Wright was well known for her campaigning in support of the conservation of the Great Barrier Reef and Fraser Island. With some friends, she helped found one of the earliest nature conservation movements.
She was also an impassioned advocate for the Aboriginal land rights movement. Tom Shapcott, reviewing With Love and Fury, her posthumous collection of selected letters published in 2007, comments that her letter on this topic to the Australian Prime Minister John Howard was "almost brutal in its scorn".Tom Shapcott, Book Review, "With Love and Fury: selected letters of Juhf 284 hey ahey 398rf  dith Wright", ''Sydney Morning Herald, 10 March 2007 Shortly before her death, she attended a march in Canberra for reconciliation between non-indigenous Australians and the Aboriginal people.
Judith Wright died in Canberra on 25 June 2000, aged 85.National Library of Australia: Papers of Judith Wright; Retrieved 5 August 2013House of Representatives, Statements by Members, 26 June 2000; Retrieved 5 August 2013Senate, Adjournment, 27 June 2000; Retrieved 5 August 2013Gerard HALL, Judith Wright (1915-2000): Australian Poet & Prophet, Published in National Outlook (November 2000); Retrieved 5 August 2013The Guardian, Obituary, 29 June 2000; Retrieved 5 August 2013 

==Awards==

==Recognition==

In June 2006 the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC) announced that the new federal electorate in Queensland to be created at the 2007 federal election would be named Wright in honour of her life as a "poet and in the areas of arts, conservation and indigenous affairs in Queensland and Australia".[ref]
