[[Rafo Muñiz]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, Living people, Puerto Rican comedians, Puerto Rican male actors, Puerto Rican television producers

Rafael Muñiz García de la Noceda, better known as Rafo Muñiz (born  1956) is a Puerto Rican actor, comedian, director and, more notably, producer of television shows and concerts.
The son of legendary comic actor and producer Tommy Muñiz and brother of Pedro Muñiz; who is also a producer and actor, Rafo began acting as the young neighbor of "Miguel" in  "Gloria y Miguel" at Wapa Television, then, after graduating from high school, with his father as his father's son in law, in the legendary sitcom Los García (The Garcias) on Puerto Rico's Canal 4' (channel 4) during the late 1970s.
From there on, Rafo had on and off work as an actor, but by 1985, he had become a game show host at WAPA-TV. By that era also, he established a company named Promotores Latinos, where he performs as company President and main show producer. Promotores Latinos is know known as ProLat Entertainment.
Since  the 1980s, Muñiz has been one of the top music promoters/managers in Puerto Rico, and his firm represented such artists as Jennifer Lopez, Rubén Blades, Olga Tañón, Gilberto Santa Rosa, and others in their concerts in Puerto Rico, Venezuela and Panama.  Tanon split from his company in 2002, and Muñiz sued her for breach of contract. He quickly signed another Merengue singer, Melina León and TV personality, Silverio Pérez, to be represented by him. He has also represented Luis Raúl, a Puerto Rican stand up comedian and internationally renowned singer Jailene Cintrón. Some of his proyects in the mainland U.S. include "ViVa Puente" a star studded tribute to the late Puerto Rican superstar Tito Puente in New York, L.A., Miami and Dallas. He has produced concerts at Carnegie Hall, Lincoln Center and the Jackie Gleason Theater among other venues. Currently, he is the manager of  Gilberto Santa Rosa, and stand up comedian Raymond Arrieta .

==References==

==External links==

==See also==


