[[Small Magellanic Cloud]]

CATEGORIES: Irregular galaxies, Dwarf barred irregular galaxies, Peculiar galaxies, Low surface brightness galaxies, Small Magellanic Cloud, Magellanic Clouds, Milky Way Subgroup, Tucana (constellation), NGC objects, PGC objects, Objects within 1 Mly of Earth

The Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC) is a dwarf galaxy. It is classified as a dwarf irregular galaxy. It has a diameter of about 7,000 light-years"Magellanic Cloud." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2009. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 30 Aug. 2009 . and contains several hundred million stars.APOD: 2005 June 17 - The Small Cloud of Magellan It has a total mass of approximately 7 billion times the mass of the Sun.NASA ADS - The total mass and dark halo properties of the Small Magellanic Cloud
Some speculate that the SMC was once a barred spiral galaxy that was disrupted by the Milky Way to become somewhat irregular.[ref]
</ref> It contains a central bar structure.
At a distance of about 200,000 light-years, it is one of the Milky Way's nearest neighbors. It is also one of the most distant objects that can be seen with the naked eye.
With a mean declination of approximately −73 degrees, it can only be viewed from the Southern Hemisphere and the lower latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere. It is located in the constellation of Tucana and appears as a hazy, light patch in the night sky about 3 degrees across. It looks like a detached piece of the Milky Way. Since it has a very low surface brightness, it is best viewed from a dark site away from city lights.
It forms a pair with the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC), which lies a further 20 degrees to the east. The Small Magellanic Cloud is a member of the Local Group.

==Observation history==

In the southern hemisphere, the Magellanic clouds have long been included in the lore of native inhabitants, including south sea islanders and indigenous Australians. Persian astronomer Al Sufi labelled the larger of the two clouds as Al Bakr, the White Ox. European sailors may have first noticed the clouds during the Middle Ages when they were used for navigation. Portuguese and Dutch sailors called them the Cape Clouds, a name that was retained for several centuries. During the circumnavigation of the Earth by Ferdinand Magellan in 1519–22, they were described by Antonio Pigafetta as dim clusters of stars.[ref]
