[[Basil of Caesarea]]

CATEGORIES: 379 deaths, 4th-century births, 4th-century Romans, 4th-century bishops, Byzantine saints, Christian mystics, Church Fathers, Christian theologians, Doctors of the Church, Eastern Catholic saints, Eastern Orthodox saints, Letter writers, Greek Roman Catholic saints, People celebrated in the Lutheran liturgical calendar, Saints from Anatolia, Patristics, Ancient Christian controversies, 4th-century Christian saints, Saints of the Golden Legend, Late-Roman-era students in Athens, Greek folklore, Anglican saints, 4th-century Christian theologians

Basil of Caesarea, also called Saint Basil the Great, (329 or 330Fedwick (1981), p. 5 – January 1, 379) ([tpl]lang-el|Ἅγιος Βασίλειος ὁ Μέγας[/tpl]) was the Greek bishop of Caesarea Mazaca in Cappadocia, Asia Minor (modern-day Turkey). He was an influential theologian who supported the Nicene Creed and opposed the heresies of the early Christian church, fighting against both Arianism and the followers of Apollinaris of Laodicea. His ability to balance his theological convictions with his political connections made Basil a powerful advocate for the Nicene position.
In addition to his work as a theologian, Basil was known for his care of the poor and underprivileged. Basil established guidelines for monastic life which focus on community life, liturgical prayer, and manual labour. Together with Pachomius he is remembered as a father of communal monasticism in Eastern Christianity. He is considered a saint by the traditions of both Eastern and Western Christianity.
Basil, Gregory of Nazianzus, and Gregory of Nyssa are collectively referred to as the Cappadocian Fathers. The Eastern Orthodox Church and Eastern Catholic Churches have given him, together with Gregory of Nazianzus and John Chrysostom, the title of Great Hierarch. He is recognised as a Doctor of the Church in both Eastern Orthodoxy and in the Roman Catholic Church. He is sometimes referred to by the epithet "Ουρανοφαντωρ", "revealer of heavenly mysteries".[ref]

</ref>

==Life==

===Early life and education===

Basil was born into the wealthy family of Basil the Elder, a famous rhetor,Quasten (1986), p. 204. and Emmelia of Caesarea, in Pontus, around 330.Bowersock et al. (1999), p.336 His parents were renowned for their piety.Oratio 43.4, PG 36. 500B, tr. p.30, as presented in Rousseau (1994), p.4. His maternal grandfather was a Christian martyr, executed in the years prior to Constantine I's conversion.Davies (1991), p. 12.Rousseau (1994), p. 4. His pious widow, Macrina, herself a follower of Gregory Thaumaturgus (who had founded the nearby church of Neocaesarea),Rousseau (1994), p. 12 & p. 4 respectively raised Basil and his four siblings (who also can be venerated as saints): Macrina the Younger, Naucratius, Peter of Sebaste and Gregory of Nyssa.
Basil received more formal education in Caesarea Mazaca in Cappadocia (modern-day Kayseri, Turkey) around 350-51.Hildebrand (2007), p. 19.  There he met Gregory of Nazianzus, who would become a lifetime friend.[ref]

