[[Isaac Newton]]

CATEGORIES: 1642 births, 1727 deaths, 17th-century English writers, 17th-century Latin-language writers, 17th-century English mathematicians, 18th-century English writers, 18th-century Latin-language writers, 18th-century English mathematicians, Alumni of Trinity College, Cambridge, Antitrinitarians, Post-Reformation Arian Christians, Ballistics experts, Burials at Westminster Abbey, Cambridge mathematicians, Christian mystics, Color scientists, English alchemists, English Anglicans, English astronomers, English Christian theologians, English inventors, English mathematicians, English physicists, Experimental physicists, Fellows of the Royal Society, Fellows of Trinity College, Cambridge, Hermeticists, History of calculus, Isaac Newton, Knights Bachelor, Lucasian Professors of Mathematics, Masters of the Mint, Members of the pre-1707 Parliament of England for the University of Cambridge, Optical physicists, People from South Kesteven (district), Philosophers of science, Presidents of the Royal Society, Scientific instrument makers, People educated at The King's School, Grantham, Natural philosophers, Apocalypticists, Enlightenment scientists, Theoretical physicists, English MPs 1689–90, English MPs 1701–02, Copernican Revolution

Sir Isaac Newton [tpl]small|PRS MP[/tpl] ([tpl]IPAc-en|ˈ|n|j|uː|t|ən[/tpl];"Newton" entry in Collins English Dictionary, HarperCollins Publishers, 1998. 25 December 1642[tpl]spaced ndash[/tpl]20 March 1727) was an English physicist and mathematician (described in his own day as a "natural philosopher") who is widely recognised as one of the most influential scientists of all time and as a key figure in the scientific revolution.  His book Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica ("Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy"), first published in 1687, laid the foundations for classical mechanics.  Newton also made seminal contributions to optics and shares credit with Gottfried Leibniz for the invention of infinitesimal calculus.
Newton's Principia formulated the laws of motion and universal gravitation, which dominated scientists' view of the physical universe for the next three centuries.  By deriving Kepler's laws of planetary motion from his mathematical description of gravity, and then using the same principles to account for the trajectories of comets, the tides, the precession of the equinoxes, and other phenomena, Newton removed the last doubts about the validity of the heliocentric model of the cosmos.  This work also demonstrated that the motion of objects on Earth and of celestial bodies could be described by the same principles.  His prediction that the Earth should be shaped as an an oblate spheroid was later vindicated by the measurements of Maupertuis, La Condamine, and others, which helped convince most Continental European scientists of the superiority of Newtonian mechanics over the earlier system of Descartes.
Newton also built the first practical reflecting telescope and developed a theory of colour based on the observation that a prism decomposes white light into the many colours of the visible spectrum. He formulated an empirical law of cooling, studied the speed of sound, and introduced the notion of a Newtonian fluid.  In addition to his work on calculus, as a mathematician Newton contributed to the study of power series, generalised the binomial theorem to non-integer exponents, and developed Newton's method for approximating the roots of a function.
Newton was a fellow of Trinity College and the second Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge.  He was a devout but unorthodox Christian and, unusually for a member of the Cambridge faculty of the day, he refused to take holy orders in the Church of England, perhaps because he privately rejected the doctrine of the Trinity.  Beyond his work on the mathematical sciences, Newton dedicated much of his time to the study of biblical chronology and alchemy, but most of his work in those areas remained unpublished until long after his death.  In his later life, Newton became president of the Royal Society.  He also served the British government as Warden and Master of the Royal Mint.

==Life==

===Early life===

Isaac Newton was born (according to the Julian calendar in use in England at the time) on Christmas Day, 25 December 1642 (NS 4 January 1643), at Woolsthorpe Manor in Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth, a hamlet in the county of Lincolnshire. He was born three months after the death of his father, a prosperous farmer also named Isaac Newton. Born prematurely, he was a small child; his mother Hannah Ayscough reportedly said that he could have fit inside a quart mug (≈ 1.1 litres). When Newton was three, his mother remarried and went to live with her new husband, the Reverend Barnabus Smith, leaving her son in the care of his maternal grandmother, Margery Ayscough. The young Isaac disliked his stepfather and maintained some enmity towards his mother for marrying him, as revealed by this entry in a list of sins committed up to the age of 19: "Threatening my father and mother Smith to burn them and the house over them." Newton's mother had three children from her second marriage.[tpl]harvnb|Westfall|1980|p=55[/tpl] Although it was claimed that he was once engaged,This claim was made Dr. Stukeley in 1727, in a letter about Newton written to Dr. Richard Mead. Charles Hutton, who in the late 18th century collected oral traditions about earlier scientists, declares that there "do not appear to be any sufficient reason for his never marrying, if he had an inclination so to do. It is much more likely that he had a constitutional indifference to the state, and even to the sex in general." Charles Hutton "A Mathematical and Philosophical Dictionary" (1795/6) II p.100. Newton never married.
From the age of about twelve until he was seventeen, Newton was educated at The King's School, Grantham which taught him Latin but no mathematics. He was removed from school, and by October 1659, he was to be found at Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth, where his mother, widowed for a second time, attempted to make a farmer of him. He hated farming.Westfall 1994, pp 16–19 Henry Stokes, master at the King's School, persuaded his mother to send him back to school so that he might complete his education. Motivated partly by a desire for revenge against a schoolyard bully, he became the top-ranked student,White 1997, p. 22 distinguishing himself mainly by building sundials and models of windmills.[tpl]harvnb|Westfall|1980|pp=60–62[/tpl]
In June 1661, he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, on the recommendation of his uncle Rev William Ayscough. He started as a subsizar—paying his way by performing valet's duties—until he was awarded a scholarship in 1664, which guaranteed him four more years until he would get his M.A.[tpl]harvnb|Westfall|1980|p=71,103[/tpl] At that time, the college's teachings were based on those of Aristotle, whom Newton supplemented with modern philosophers such as Descartes, and astronomers such as Galileo and Thomas Street, through whom he learned of Kepler's work. He set down in his notebook a series of 'Quaestiones' about mechanical philosophy as he found it. In 1665, he discovered the generalised binomial theorem and began to develop a mathematical theory that later became infinitesimal calculus. Soon after Newton had obtained his B.A. degree in August 1665, the university temporarily closed as a precaution against the Great Plague. Although he had been undistinguished as a Cambridge student,ed. Michael Hoskins (1997). Cambridge Illustrated History of Astronomy, p. 159. Cambridge University Press Newton's private studies at his home in Woolsthorpe over the subsequent two years saw the development of his theories on calculus,[tpl]cite web |last=Newton |first=Isaac |title=Waste Book |url=http://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS-ADD-04004/|publisher=Cambridge University Digital Library|accessdate=10 January 2012[/tpl] optics, and the law of gravitation. In April 1667, he returned to Cambridge and in October was elected as a fellow of Trinity.[tpl]acad|id=RY644J|name=Newton, Isaac[/tpl][tpl]harvnb|Westfall|1980|p=178[/tpl] Fellows were required to become ordained priests, although this was not enforced in the restoration years and an assertion of conformity to the Church of England was sufficient. However, by 1675 the issue could not be avoided and by then his unconventional views stood in the way.[tpl]harvnb|Westfall|1980|pp=330–1[/tpl] Nevertheless, Newton managed to avoid it by means of a special permission from Charles II (see "Middle years" section below).
His studies had impressed the Lucasian professor, Isaac Barrow, who was more anxious to develop his own religious and administrative potential (he became master of Trinity two years later), and in 1669, Newton succeeded him, only one year after he received his M.A.

===Middle years===

====Mathematics====

Newton's work has been said "to distinctly advance every branch of mathematics then studied".W W Rouse Ball (1908), "A short account of the history of mathematics", at page 319. His work on the subject usually referred to as fluxions or calculus,  seen in a manuscript of October 1666, is now published among Newton's mathematical papers.D T Whiteside (ed.), The Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton (Volume 1), (Cambridge University Press, 1967), part 7 "The October 1666 Tract on Fluxions", at page 400, in 2008 reprint.  The author of the manuscript De analysi per aequationes numero terminorum infinitas, sent by Isaac Barrow to John Collins in June 1669, was identified by Barrow in a letter sent to Collins in August of that year as:D Gjertsen (1986), "The Newton handbook", (London (Routledge & Kegan Paul) 1986), at page 149.  [tpl]quote|Mr Newton, a fellow of our College, and very young ... but of an extraordinary genius and proficiency in these things. [/tpl]
Newton later became involved in a dispute with Leibniz over priority in the development of infinitesimal calculus (the Leibniz–Newton calculus controversy). Most modern historians believe that Newton and Leibniz developed infinitesimal calculus independently, although with very different notations. Occasionally it has been suggested that Newton published almost nothing about it until 1693, and did not give a full account until 1704, while Leibniz began publishing a full account of his methods in 1684. (Leibniz's notation and "differential Method", nowadays recognised as much more convenient notations, were adopted by continental European mathematicians, and after 1820 or so, also by British mathematicians.) Such a suggestion, however, fails to notice the content of calculus which critics of Newton's time and modern times have pointed out in Book 1 of Newton's Principia itself (published 1687) and in its forerunner manuscripts, such as De motu corporum in gyrum ("On the motion of bodies in orbit"), of 1684. The Principia is not written in the language of calculus either as we know it or as Newton's (later) 'dot' notation would write it. His work extensively uses infinitesimal calculus in geometric form based on limiting values of the ratios of vanishing small quantities: in the Principia itself, Newton gave demonstration of this under the name of 'the method of first and last ratios'Newton, 'Principia', 1729 English translation, at page 41. and explained why he put his expositions in this form,Newton, 'Principia', 1729 English translation, at page 54. remarking also that 'hereby the same thing is performed as by the method of indivisibles'.
Because of this, the Principia has been called "a book dense with the theory and application of the infinitesimal calculus" in modern timesClifford Truesdell, Essays in the History of Mechanics (Berlin, 1968), at p.99. and "lequel est presque tout de ce calcul" ('nearly all of it is of this calculus') in Newton's time.In the preface to the Marquis de L'Hospital's Analyse des Infiniment Petits (Paris, 1696). His use of methods involving "one or more orders of the infinitesimally small" is present in his De motu corporum in gyrum of 1684Starting with De motu corporum in gyrum, see also (Latin) Theorem 1. and in his papers on motion "during the two decades preceding 1684".D T Whiteside (1970), "The Mathematical principles underlying Newton's Principia Mathematica" in Journal for the History of Astronomy, vol.1, pages 116–138, especially at pages 119–120.
Newton had been reluctant to publish his calculus because he feared controversy and criticism.Stewart 2009, p.107 He was close to the Swiss mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier. In 1691, Duillier started to write a new version of Newton's Principia, and corresponded with Leibniz.Westfall 1980, pp 538–539 In 1693, the relationship between Duillier and Newton deteriorated and the book was never completed.
Starting in 1699, other members of the Royal Society (of which Newton was a member) accused Leibniz of plagiarism.  The dispute then broke out in full force in 1711 when the Royal Society proclaimed in a study that it was Newton who was the true discoverer and labelled Leibniz a fraud. This study was cast into doubt when it was later found that Newton himself wrote the study's concluding remarks on Leibniz. Thus began the bitter controversy which marred the lives of both Newton and Leibniz until the latter's death in 1716.Ball 1908, p. 356ff
Newton is generally credited with the generalised binomial theorem, valid for any exponent. He discovered Newton's identities, Newton's method, classified cubic plane curves (polynomials of degree three in two variables), made substantial contributions to the theory of finite differences, and was the first to use fractional indices and to employ coordinate geometry to derive solutions to Diophantine equations. He approximated partial sums of the harmonic series by logarithms (a precursor to Euler's summation formula), and was the first to use power series with confidence and to revert power series. Newton's work on infinite series was inspired by Simon Stevin's decimals.[tpl]citation | last1 = Błaszczyk | first1 = Piotr |last2 = Katz | first2 = Mikhail |author2-link = Mikhail Katz | last3 = Sherry | first3 = David | arxiv = 1202.4153 |doi = 10.1007/s10699-012-9285-8 | issue = |journal = Foundations of Science | pages = | title = Ten misconceptions from the history of analysis and their debunking | volume = |year = 2012[/tpl]
He was appointed Lucasian Professor of Mathematics in 1669 on Barrow's recommendation. During that time, any fellow of Cambridge or Oxford was required to become an ordained Anglican priest. However, the terms of the Lucasian professorship required that the holder not be active in the church (presumably so as to have more time for science). Newton argued that this should exempt him from the ordination requirement, and Charles II, whose permission was needed, accepted this argument. Thus a conflict between Newton's religious views and Anglican orthodoxy was averted.White 1997, p. 151

====Optics====

In 1666, Newton observed that the spectrum of colours exiting a prism is oblong, even when the light ray entering the prism is circular, which is to say, the prism refracts different colours by different angles.  This led him to conclude that colour is a property intrinsic to light—a point which had been debated in prior years.
From 1670 to 1672, Newton lectured on optics.[tpl]cite web |last=Newton |first=Isaac |title=Hydrostatics, Optics, Sound and Heat|url=http://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS-ADD-03970/|publisher=Cambridge University Digital Library|accessdate=10 January 2012[/tpl] During this period he investigated the refraction of light, demonstrating that the multicoloured spectrum produced by a prism could be recomposed into white light by a lens and a second prism.Ball 1908, p. 324 Modern scholarship has revealed that Newton's analysis and resynthesis of white light owes a debt to corpuscular alchemy.William R. Newman,  "Newton's Early Optical Theory and its Debt to Chymistry," in Danielle Jacquart and Michel Hochmann, eds., Lumière et vision dans les sciences et dans les arts (Geneva: Droz, 2010), pp. 283-307.  A free access online version of this article can be found at the Chymistry of Isaac Newton project
He also showed that coloured light does not change its properties by separating out a coloured beam and shining it on various objects. Newton noted that regardless of whether it was reflected, scattered, or transmitted, it remained the same colour. Thus, he observed that colour is the result of objects interacting with already-coloured light rather than objects generating the colour themselves. This is known as Newton's theory of colour.Ball 1908, p. 325
From this work, he concluded that the lens of any refracting telescope would suffer from the dispersion of light into colours (chromatic aberration). As a proof of the concept, he constructed a telescope using a mirror as the objective to bypass that problem. Building the design, the first known functional reflecting telescope, today known as a Newtonian telescope, involved solving the problem of a suitable mirror material and shaping technique. Newton ground his own mirrors out of a custom composition of highly reflective speculum metal, using Newton's rings to judge the quality of the optics for his telescopes. In late 1668 he was able to produce this first reflecting telescope. In 1671, the Royal Society asked for a demonstration of his reflecting telescope.White 1997, p168 Their interest encouraged him to publish his notes, On Colour, which he later expanded into the work Opticks. When Robert Hooke criticised some of Newton's ideas, Newton was so offended that he withdrew from public debate. Newton and Hooke had brief exchanges in 1679–80, when Hooke, appointed to manage the Royal Society's correspondence, opened up a correspondence intended to elicit contributions from Newton to Royal Society transactions, which had the effect of stimulating Newton to work out a proof that the elliptical form of planetary orbits would result from a centripetal force inversely proportional to the square of the radius vector (see Newton's law of universal gravitation – History and De motu corporum in gyrum). But the two men remained generally on poor terms until Hooke's death.Iliffe, Robert (2007) Newton. A very short introduction, Oxford University Press 2007
Newton argued that light is composed of particles or corpuscles, which were refracted by accelerating into a denser medium. He verged on soundlike waves to explain the repeated pattern of reflection and transmission by thin films (Opticks Bk.II, Props. 12), but still retained his theory of 'fits' that disposed corpuscles to be reflected or transmitted (Props.13). However, later physicists favoured a purely wavelike explanation of light to account for the interference patterns and the general phenomenon of diffraction. Today's quantum mechanics, photons, and the idea of wave–particle duality bear only a minor resemblance to Newton's understanding of light.
In his Hypothesis of Light of 1675, Newton posited the existence of the ether to transmit forces between particles. The contact with the theosophist Henry More, revived his interest in alchemy. He replaced the ether with occult forces based on Hermetic ideas of attraction and repulsion between particles. John Maynard Keynes, who acquired many of Newton's writings on alchemy, stated that "Newton was not the first of the age of reason: He was the last of the magicians." Newton's interest in alchemy cannot be isolated from his contributions to science. This was at a time when there was no clear distinction between alchemy and science. Had he not relied on the occult idea of action at a distance, across a vacuum, he might not have developed his theory of gravity. (See also Isaac Newton's occult studies.)
In 1704, Newton published Opticks, in which he expounded his corpuscular theory of light. He considered light to be made up of extremely subtle corpuscles, that ordinary matter was made of grosser corpuscles and speculated that through a kind of alchemical transmutation "Are not gross Bodies and Light convertible into one another, ...and may not Bodies receive much of their Activity from the Particles of Light which enter their Composition?" Newton also constructed a primitive form of a frictional electrostatic generator, using a glass globe (Opticks, 8th Query).
In an article entitled "Newton, prisms, and the 'opticks' of tunable lasers" it is indicated that Newton in his book Opticks was the first to show a diagram using a prism as a beam expander. In the same book he describes, via diagrams, the use of multiple-prism arrays. Some 278 years after Newton's discussion, multiple-prism beam expanders became central to the development of narrow-linewidth tunable lasers. Also, the use of these prismatic beam expanders led to the multiple-prism dispersion theory.
