[[Heinrich Kramer]]

CATEGORIES: 1430s births, 1505 deaths, People from Sélestat, German Roman Catholic priests, German Dominicans, Inquisitors, Demonologists, Witch hunters, 15th-century German writers, 15th-century Roman Catholic priests, 16th-century Roman Catholic priests

Heinrich Kramer ([tpl]circa[/tpl] 1430 – 1505), also known under the Latinized name Henricus Institor,"Institoris" is the Latin genitive case of "Institor" ("retailer"). It was a common practice in those times to take the genitive of the father's name for latinization, but this genitive was used as nominative in Latin texts ("Venerabilis & religiosus frater Henricus institoris"). In German texts this name was abridged to "Institor", according to the custom of omitting Latin endings in translations (cf. "Iuvenalis" – "Juvenal").Paul Hinschius. Das Kirchenrecht der Katholiken und Protestanten in Deutschland. Band VI. 1897. Reprint Guttentag, 1959. was a German churchman and inquisitor.
Born in Sélestat, Alsace, he joined the Dominican Order at an early age and while still a young man was appointed Prior of the Dominican house of his native town.
At some date before 1474 he was appointed Inquisitor for the Tyrol, Salzburg, Bohemia and Moravia. His eloquence in the pulpit and tireless activity received recognition at Rome and he was the right-hand man of the Archbishop of Salzburg. By the time of the Bull Summis desiderantes of Pope Innocent VIII in 1484 he was already associated with Jacob Sprenger to make an inquisition for witches and sorcerers. In 1485 he drew up a treatise on witchcraft which was incorporated in the Malleus Maleficarum (literally "The Hammer of Witches").
Kramer failed in his attempt to obtain endorsement for this work from the top theologians of the Inquisition at the Faculty of Cologne, and they condemned the book as recommending unethical and illegal procedures, as well as being inconsistent with Catholic doctrines of demonology.
In 1495 he was summoned to Venice to give public lectures, which were very popular. In 1500 he was empowered to proceed against the Waldensians and Picards.
He died in either Brünn or Olmütz, in Moravia, in 1505.

==Major works==

==Notes==

==External links==


