[[Effects of marriage]]

CATEGORIES: Marriage, Law of obligations

In family law, effects of marriage is a legal term of art used to describe all of the rights and obligations that individuals may be subject and entitled to if they are in a common-law marriage, an annulled marriage, domestic partnership or a civil union.
Thus, even if the underlying marriage is held to be void there may still be rights and obligations that continue and are recognized by court order. An example may be an annulled marriage where the court awards alimony to the weaker, poorer or less well educated spouse to allow them a period of time to go back to school or re-enter the work force.
There are a few positive and negative influences of marriage on an individual.  First of all, an individual becomes excited that they will begin to share their life with someone who cares for them, and whom they feel comforted by.  They will feel excited to know that soon they will be starting a family of their own, and that they will become parents of their own children.  Research has shown that those individuals who live a stable marital relationship tend to live longer, have a better physical health, better functional health at old age and better emotional health than those in troubled marriages or who are divorced.
On the other hand, there a few negative influences of marriage on an adult.  An adult can become stressed out on the fact that they will need to make compromises and sacrifices, in order to form a good marital relationship.  This can lead to a loss of hobbies, because there are restrictions about what the individuals can do; and these restrictions are for both the men and women in the relationship.  The adult may develop a sense of stress because they have a lot of responsibility ahead of them.  In addition, the individuals in the relationship can become upset by the fact that they have to make sure that their relationship has no betrayals, and it is kept loyal, throughout the couple’s lives.

