[[Cattaraugus Reservation]]

CATEGORIES: American Indian reservations in New York, Seneca tribe, Geography of Cattaraugus County, New York, Geography of Chautauqua County, New York, Geography of Erie County, New York

Cattaraugus Reservation is an Indian reservation of the Seneca Indian Nation of the Iroquois Confederacy located in New York. As of the 2000 census, the Indian reservation had a total population of 2,412. Its total area is about 34.4 mi² (89.1 km²). The reservation stretches from Lake Erie inward along Cattaraugus Creek,Kirby, C.D. (1976).  The Early History of Gowanda and The Beautiful Land of the Cattaraugus. Gowanda, NY: Niagara Frontier Publishing Company, Inc./Gowanda Area Bi-Centennial Committee, Inc.Historical sketch of the Village of Gowanda, N.Y. in commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of its incorporation, August 8, 1898. Buffalo, NY: The Matthews-Northrup Company, Leonard, I.R., Reprinted 1998, Salem, MA: Higginson Book Company. along either side of NY 438.  It is divided among three counties for census purposes:

==Background and location==

There is a small cluster of Seneca-owned businesses along US 20 and NY 5 where they cross through the reservation, including a Bingo Hall with a Poker Room and various video slot machines. Interstate 90 crosses through the reservation with the closest exit being in Irving, New York. 
In Erie County, the reservation is bordered by the Towns of Brant, North Collins, and Collins; in Cattaraugus County by the Town of Perrysburg; and in Chautauqua County by the Town of Hanover. (At the reservation's southeast corner, near the village of Gowanda, it comes literally within a few feet of bordering the Town of Persia in Cattaraugus County, but does not actually do so.)
The reservation is mostly rural, with one-family homes along Route 438 interspersed with businesses such as tobacco shops. The reservation is divided into several communities such as Newtown, Bucktown, Pinewoods, Eleven Acres, Ozarks and Indian Hill. At the center of the reservation along Route 438 are the Seneca Nation government offices, Head Start/Daycare Center, Community buildings and the volunteer fire department.

==References==


