[[Lake Washington Ship Canal]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures in Seattle, Washington, Transportation in Seattle, Washington, Ship canals, Canals in Washington (state), National Register of Historic Places in Seattle, Washington, Canals on the National Register of Historic Places, Buildings and structures on the National Register of Historic Places in Washington (state), Navigation-related listings on the National Register of Historic Places, Transport infrastructure completed in 1934

The Lake Washington Ship Canal, which runs through the city of Seattle, Washington, connects the fresh water body of Lake Washington with the salt water inland sea of Puget Sound. The Hiram M. Chittenden Locks accommodate the approximately 20-foot difference in water level between Lake Washington and the Sound.  The Canal runs east/west, and connects Union Bay, Lake Union, the Montlake Cut, Portage Bay, the Fremont Cut, Salmon Bay, and Shilshole Bay, with the Sound, which empties into the Pacific Ocean.

==History==

The ship canal project began in 1911 and was officially completed in 1934.  Prior to construction of the Lake Washington Ship Canal, otherwise known as the Salmon Bay Waterway, water used to exit Lake Washington via the Black River which flowed from the south end of Lake Washington into the Duwamish River.
As early as 1854, there was discussion of building a navigable connection between the Lake Washington and Puget Sound for the purpose of transporting logs, milled lumber, and fishing vessels. Thirteen years later, the United States Navy endorsed a canal project, which included a plan for building a naval shipyard on Lake Washington. In 1891 the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers started planning the project. Some preliminary work was begun in 1906, and work began in earnest five years later. The delays in canal planning and construction resulted in the U.S. Navy building the Puget Sound Naval Shipyard in Bremerton, Washington, which is located across the Sound from Seattle.

==Canal crossings==

The Canal's crossings, from east to west, are:

==Seattle landmarks==

The Lake Washington Ship Canal and the Hiram M. Chittenden Locks are listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The Montlake Cut, along with the Montlake Bridge are City of Seattle Designated Landmarks (ID #107995).Landmarks Alphabetical Listing for M, Individual Landmarks, Department of Neighborhoods, City of Seattle. Accessed December 28, 2007.

==Notes==


