[[Far-right politics]]

CATEGORIES: Far-right politics, Political terminology

Far-right politics are right-wing politics that are considered to be further to the right of those of the mainstream centre-right on the traditional left-right spectrum. They usually involve support for social inequality and social hierarchy, elements of social conservatism, and opposition to most forms of liberalism and socialism. Both terms are commonly used to describe fascist, neo-fascist or other ideologies and organizations that feature extreme nationalist, chauvinist, xenophobic, racist, or reactionary views.Carlisle, Rodney P., ed., The Encyclopedia of Politics: The Left and the Right, Volume 2: The Right (Thousand Oaks, California, United States; London, England; New Delhi, India: Sage Publications, 2005) p. 693. Some movements generally considered of far-right, such as the Nazis, have pursued oppression and genocide against groups of people on the basis of their alleged inferiority.Hilliard, Robert L. and Michael C. Keith, Waves of Rancor: Tuning in the Radical Right (Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharpe, Inc., 1999) p. 38. 

==Definition and terminology==

Far-right politics commonly includes authoritarianism, anti-communism, and nativism.Hilliard, Robert L. and Michael C. Keith, Waves of Rancor: Tuning in the Radical Right (Armonk,New York: M.E. Sharpe Inc., 1999, p.43 Often, the term "far right" is applied to fascists and neo-Nazis,Carlisle, Rodney P., ed., The Encyclopedia of Politics: The Left and the Right, Volume 2: The Right (Thousand Oaks, California, United States; London, England; New Delhi, India: Sage Publications, 2005) p. 694.Horst, Junginger, "The Study of Religion Under the Impact of Fascism" in Numen Book Series, vol. 117 (Brill, 2008) p. 273.Griffin, Roger: "The Palingenetic Core of Fascism", Che cos'è il fascismo? Interpretazioni e prospettive di ricerche, Ideazione editrice, Rome, 2003 AH.Brookes.ac.ukStackleberg, Rodney Hitler's Germany, Routeledge, 1999, pp. 3-5Eatwell, Roger: "A 'Spectral-Syncretic Approach to Fascism', The Fascism Reader, Routledge, 2003 pp 71–80 Books.google.com and major elements of fascism have been deemed clearly far-right, such as its belief that supposedly superior people have the right to dominate society while purging allegedly inferior elements, and — in the case of Nazism — genocide of people deemed to be inferior.Woshinsky, Oliver H., Explaining Politics: Culture, Institutions, and Political Behavior (Oxon, England; New York City, United States: Routledge, 2008) p. 156. Claims that superior people should proportionally have greater rights than inferior people are sometimes associated with the far right.Oliver H. Woshinsky. Explaining Politics: Culture, Institutions, and Political Behavior. (Oxon, England; New York City, United States: Routledge, 2008) p. 155. The far right has historically favoured an elitist society based on belief of the legitimacy of the rule of a supposed superior minority over the inferior masses.Oliver H. Woshinsky. Explaining Politics: Culture, Institutions, and Political Behavior. (Oxon, England; New York City, United States: Routledge, 2008) p. 154. Far-right politics usually involves anti-immigration and anti-integration stances towards groups that are deemed inferior and undesirable.Parsons, Craig and Timothy M. Smeeding, Immigration and the transformation of Europe (Cambridge University Press, 2006) p. 18. Concerning the socio-cultural dimension (nationality, culture and migration), one far-right position could be the view that certain ethnic, racial or religious groups should stay separate, and that the interests of one’s own group should be prioritised.
There is disagreement among academics concerning the most appropriate way of defining the ideologies of right-wing extremist parties.Mudde, C. (1996), ‘The War of Words: Defining The Extreme Right Party’, West European Politics, 19/2: 225-248 Within this debate different scholars disagree as to the number and combination of ideological features that qualify a party as right-wing extremist as well as the different typologies used to distinguish between parties within this family. According to Christina Liang, this "academic field is especially peculiar about its terminology. Each label carries with it a specific understanding of this family of political parties as well as a particular set of assumptions regarding their origins and electoral success".Liang, C. (2007) Europe for the Europeans: The Foreign and Security Policy of the Populist Radical Right, Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing, p. 284-285 In an extensive survey of the literature, academic Cas Mudde found 26 definitions of right-wing extremism that contained 57 different ideological features.Fenemma, M. (1997), Some Conceptual Issues and Problems in the Comparison of Anti-Immigrant Parties in Western Europe, Party Politics October 1997 vol. 3 no. 4 473-492 Alongside the theoretical debate concerning the nature of these parties there is also an empirical debate concerning who speaks for right-wing extremist parties and how to measure their ideology given that many reject the right-wing extremist label being applied to them.
One issue when it comes to terminology is whether parties should be labelled "radical" or "extreme", a distinction that is made by the German Federal Constitutional Court when determining whether a party can be banned. Another question is the what the label "right" implies when applied to the extreme right, given that many parties labelled as right-wing extremist tended to advance neo-liberal and free market agendas as late as the 1980s but can now advocate economic policies more traditionally associated with the left, such as anti-globalisation, nationalisation and protectionism. One approach, drawing on the writings of Norberto Bobbio, argues that attitudes towards equality are what distinguish between left and right and therefore allow these parties to be positioned on the right of the political spectrum. There is also debate about how appropriate the labels fascist or neo-fascist are. According to Cas Mudde, "the labels Neo-Nazi and to a lesser extent neo-fascism are now used exclusively for parties and groups that explicitly state a desire to restore the Third Reich or quote historical National Socialism as their ideological influence".C. (2007), The Ideology of the Extreme Right Manchester: Manchester University Press, p. 12
Jurgen Falter and Siegfried Schumann define right-wing extremism with reference to ten ideological features which they believe constitutes a core extreme right ideology, including hyper-nationalism, ethnocentralism, anti-communism, anti-parliamentarianism and anti-pluralism.Klandermaus, B. and Mayer, N. (2006), ''Extreme Right Activists in Europe: Through the Magnifying Glass, Routledge: Abingdon, p. 4
Cas Mudde identified five key features – nationalism, racism, xenophobia, anti-democracy and the belief in a strong state – based on the fact that they  appear in 50% of the definitions of the extreme-right that he surveyed.Mudde, C. (1995), ‘Right-Wing Extremism Analyzed: A Comparative Analysis of the Ideologies of Three Alleged Right-Wing Extremist Parties (NPD, NDP, CP’86)’, European Journal of Political Research, 27/2: 206 However, in later writings he revisited his earlier assessment and argued in favour of a definition based upon three features: authoritarianism, populism and nativism.
According to Elisabeth Carter, the two defining features of a right-wing extremist party are: a rejection of fundamental human equality, which she asserts is what makes the party right-wing,Carter, E.  (2005),  The Extreme Right in Western Europe: Success or Failure?, Manchester: Manchester University Press, pp. 13-23 and a rejection of the fundamental democratic values of the state, which makes it extremist.
Proponents of the horseshoe theory interpretation of the left-right spectrum identify the far-left and far-right as having more in common with each other as extremists than each have towards moderate centrists.William Safire. Safire's Political Dictionary. Oxford, England, UK: Oxford University Press, 2008. Pp. 385.

==History==

The German political scientist Klaus von Beyme describes three historical phases in the development of far-right parties in Western Europe after World War II.Widfeldt, Anders, “A fourth phase of the extreme right? Nordic immigration-critical parties in a comparative context”. In: NORDEUROPAforum (2010:1/2), 7-31, http://edoc.hu-berlin.de/nordeuropaforum/2010-1/widfeldt-anders-7/XML/Klaus von Beyme: “Right-wing extremism in post-war Europe”. In: West European Politics 11 (1988:2), 2–18.
From 1945 to the mid-1950s, far-right parties were marginalised, their ideologies discredited due to the recent existence and defeat of Nazism. Thus in the years immediately following World War II, the main objective of far-right parties was survival; achieving any political impact at all, was largely not expected.
From the mid-1950s to the 1970s, the so-called "populist protest phase" emerged with sporadic electoral success. Far-right parties during this period drew to them charismatic leaders whose profound mistrust of the political establishment led to an "us-versus-them" mind set: “us” being  the nation's citizenry, “them,” the politicians and bureaucrats currently in-office; beginning in the 1980s, electoral success of far-right political candidates made it possible to revitalize anti-immigration as a mainstream issue.

==Gallery==

File:Chernosotenzy v odessa.jpg|Supporters of the historic Russian far-right monarchist and antisemitic ultranationalist Black Hundreds movement marching in 1905.
File:Mussd.jpg|Blackshirts of the National Fascist Party led by Benito Mussolini during the March on Rome in 1922.
File:Ku Klux Klan members march down Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, D.C. in 1928.jpg|Members of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK), an American far-right white supremacist group, marching in a mass rally in Washington, D.C. in 1928.
File:Bundesarchiv Bild 102-02134, Bad Harzburg, Gründung der Harzburger Front.jpg|Nazis alongside members of the far-right reactionary and monarchist German National People's Party (DNVP), in 1931 during the Nazi-DNVP alliance in the Harzburg Front.
File:Rovastabla avatas Monor.jpg|Supporters of Hungarian far-right movement Jobbik in 2011.

==Bibliography==

==References==


