</ref><ref group="n" name="Shaft">Shafter, Texas (1884) is named after Colonel Shafter. It is located some eighteen miles north of Presido on U.S. Highway 67, at the east end of the Chinati Mountains. John W. Spencer found silver ore there and took it to Fort Davis to be assayed. It was determined to be worth $45 per ton.  In October 1880 Shafter and two officers who later sat on Flipper's court-martial began buying land around the Spencer claim. They were unable to buy several sections of lands because they lacked capital. In late June 1882 they organized "Presidio Mining Company" and the remaining sections were bought.  Allegations of where Shafter got the money from over the next year were squashed. No investigation was ever conducted.  Colonel Shafter continued his career until he retired in 1900 as a Major General of Volunteers.</ref> assumed command at [[Fort Davis National Historic Site|Fort Davis]] in March 1881. He had been the commander of the First Infantry Regiment at Fort Davis. Shafter had a reputation as harassing officers he disliked. While  he tolerated black Buffalo Soldiers, he hated seeing a black officer. Flipper was dismissed without cause as quartermaster within days. Then Shafter "asked" Flipper to keep the quartermaster's safe in his quarters. Being "asked" by a superior officer was a ''de facto'' order and Flipper complied.  In July 1881 Flipper found a shortage of over $2,000.00. Realizing that this could be used against him by officers intent on forcing him out of the army, he attempted to hide the discrepancy, which was later discovered, then he lied about it when confronted. In August he was arrested by Shafter for embezzling government funds. Word quickly spread about the missing money.  Many felt it was a setup and soldiers and the community came up with the money to replace what was missing within four days.  Shafter accepted the money then convened a court-martial on 17 September 1881.<ref name=Old/>
In December 1881 the court-martial found Flipper innocent of the main charge.  But another charge was added during the trial and he was found guilty "of conduct unbecoming an officer and gentleman," and sentenced to be "dismissed from the service of the United States." It was more than a harsh sentence. In two prior situations involving white officers who were found guilty of embezzlement, neither officer was dismissed nor dishonored.  The letters exchanged between Mollie Dwyer (Nolan's sister-in-law) and Flipper were used against Flipper. Relationships between whites and blacks were strictly forbidden in the viewpoint of the white officers on the board. Despite appeals, and denial of a lighter sentence from President Chester A. Arthur, Flipper was drummed out of the army with a dismissal, the officer equivalent of a dishonorable discharge, on 30 June 1882. For the rest of his life, Flipper contested the charges and fought to regain his commission.

==Post military==

After his dismissal, Flipper remained in Texas, working as a civil engineer. In 1898, he volunteered to serve in the Spanish-American War, but requests to restore his commission were ignored by Congress. He spent time in Mexico, and on returning to the United States, he served as an advisor to Senator Albert Fall on the revolutionary politics in that country. When Fall became Secretary of the Interior in 1921, he brought Flipper with him to  Washington, D.C. to serve as his assistant.
In 1923 Flipper went to work in Venezuela as an engineer in the petroleum industry. He retired to Atlanta in 1931, and died in 1940.

==Legacy==

In 1976 descendants and supporters applied to the Army Board for the Correction of Military Records on behalf of Flipper.  The Board, after stating that it did not have the authority to overturn his court-martial conviction, concluded the conviction and punishment were "unduly harsh and unjust" and recommended that Flipper’s dismissal be changed to a good conduct discharge.  The Assistant Secretary of the Army (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) and the Adjutant General approved the Board's findings, conclusions, and recommendations and directed that the Department of the Army issue Flipper a Certificate of Honorable Discharge, dated 30 June 1882, in lieu of his dismissal on the same date. On 21 October 1997, a private law firm filed an application of pardon with the Secretary of the Army on Flipper's behalf. Seven months later, the application was forwarded by the Acting Assistant Secretary of the Army (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) to the Office of the Pardon Attorney at the Department of Justice with a recommendation that the pardon be approved.  Many pardon applications had been rejected in the past – as a matter of policy – because the intended recipients were deceased. However, President Bill Clinton pardoned Flipper on 19 February 1999.
After his discharge was changed, a bust of Flipper was unveiled at West Point. Since then, an annual Henry O. Flipper Award has been granted to graduating cadets at the Academy who exhibit "leadership, self-discipline, and perseverance in the face of unusual difficulties."
Throughout his life, Flipper was a prolific author, writing about scientific topics, the history of the Southwest, and his own experiences. In The Colored Cadet at West Point (1878) he describes his experiences at the military academy. In the posthumous Negro Frontiersman: The Western Memoirs of Henry O. Flipper (1963), he describes his life in Texas and Arizona after his discharge from the army.

==See also==

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==


