[[Pale Rider]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 films, Films directed by Clint Eastwood, Films shot anamorphically, Malpaso Productions films, Warner Bros. films, American films, English-language films, Films shot in Idaho, 1980s Western (genre) films, Films set in California, Films set in the 1880s, Mining in film

Pale Rider is a 1985 American western film produced and directed by Clint Eastwood, who also stars in the lead role. This movie bears a striking similarity to the classic Western Shane, as well as similarities to Eastwood's earlier film High Plains Drifter. The title is a reference to the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, as the rider of a pale horse is Death.

==Plot==

The film opens in the countryside outside the fictional town of Lahood, California, and takes place sometime in the 1880s (based on remarks in the film about outlawing hydraulic mining). Thugs working for big-time miner Coy LaHood ride in and destroy the camp of a group of struggling miners and their families who have settled in nearby Carbon Canyon and are panning for gold there. In leaving, they also shoot the little dog of 14-year old Megan Wheeler. As Megan buries it in the woods and prays for a miracle, we see a stranger heading to the town on horseback.
Megan's mother, Sarah, is keeping company with Hull Barret, the leader of the miners. Hull heads off into town to pick up supplies, where the same thugs start to beat him up and he is rescued by the stranger, who takes the men on single-handed. Hull invites him to his house and while Eastwood's character is washing, Hull notices what looks like 6 bullet wounds to his back. Shortly after, he appears wearing a clerical collar and thereafter is called Preacher.
Coy LaHood's son Josh attempts to scare Preacher with a show of strength from his giant work hand, Club, who with one hammer blow smashes a large rock that Preacher and Hull had been laboring over. When Club attempts to attack Preacher, he hits him in the face with his hammer and delivers a blow to Club's groin. Coy LaHood has been away in Sacramento and is furious to learn about Preacher’s arrival through his son, since this will stiffen the resistance of the tin-panners. Having failed to bribe him to settle in the town instead, LaHood offers to buy the miners out, initially for $100, then $125 and then the Preacher goads him into raising his offer to $1,000 per claim, but only if they leave within 24 hours; otherwise LaHood threatens to hire a corrupt Marshal named Stockburn to clear them out.
The miners initially want to take the offer but, when Hull reminds them why they came and what they have sacrificed, they decide to stay and fight. The next morning, however, the Preacher disappears. Megan, who has grown fond of the Preacher, heads out looking for him, but Josh captures and attempts to rape her, whilst his cohorts look on and encourage him. Club sees what is happening and moves forward to help her before Josh can do anything serious. At this moment the Preacher arrives on horseback armed with a revolver he has recovered from a Wells Fargo office and, after shooting Josh in the hand when he goes for his gun, takes Megan back to her mother in the mining camp.
Stockburn arrives at the town and he and his men gun down Spider, one of the miners, who was drunkenly insulting LaHood from the street. LaHood describes the Preacher to Stockburn, who says that he sounds like someone that he once knew, but that he couldn't be, since that man is dead.
Preacher teams up with Hull and they go to LaHood's strip mining site and blow it up with dynamite. To stop Hull from following him, Preacher then scares off Hull's horse and rides into town alone. In the gun fight that follows he kills all but two of Coy's thugs and then, one by one, Stockburn’s men as they hunt for him through the town. Finally he shoots it out with Stockburn, too, who recognizes him in disbelief. Coy LaHood, watching from his office, aims a rifle at Preacher, only to be killed by Hull coming in through a back door.
Preacher rides his horse out of a barn and by way of thanks remarks to Hull "Long walk" before riding off into the snow covered mountains. Megan then drives into town and shouts her love and thanks after him. The words echo along the ravine that he is traversing.

==Cast==

==Production==

Pale Rider was primarily filmed in the Boulder Mountains and the Sawtooth National Recreation Area in central Idaho, just north of Sun Valley in late 1984. The opening credits scene featured the jagged Sawtooth Mountains south of Stanley. Train-station scenes were filmed in Tuolumne County, California, near Jamestown. Scenes of a more established Gold Rush town (in which Eastwood's character picks up his pistol at a Wells Fargo office) were filmed in the real Gold Rush town of Columbia, also in Tuolumne County, California.Hughes, p.36

==Religious themes==

In an audio interview, Clint Eastwood said that his character Preacher "is an out-and-out ghost".[ref]
