[[Cerebrovascular disease]]

CATEGORIES: Cerebrovascular diseases

 
Cerebrovascular disease is a group of brain dysfunctions related to disease of the blood vessels supplying the brain. Hypertension is the most important cause; it damages the blood vessel lining, endothelium, exposing the underlying collagen where platelets aggregate to initiate a repairing process which is not always complete and perfect. Sustained hypertension permanently changes the architecture of the blood vessels making them narrow, stiff, deformed, uneven and more vulnerable to fluctuations in blood pressure.
A fall in blood pressure during sleep can then lead to a marked reduction in blood flow in the narrowed blood vessels causing ischemic stroke in the morning.  Conversely, a sudden rise in blood pressure due to excitation during the daytime can cause tearing of the blood vessels resulting in intracranial hemorrhage. Cerebrovascular disease primarily affects people who are elderly or have a history of diabetes, smoking, or ischemic heart disease. The results of cerebrovascular disease can include a stroke, or occasionally a hemorrhagic stroke.  Ischemia or other blood vessel dysfunctions can affect the person during a cerebrovascular incident.

==Classification==

A transient ischemic attack (TIA) leaves little to no permanent damage within the brain. The symptoms of this include facial weakness, visual impairment, loss of coordination, or balance, a sudden headache, and mental confusion with unintelligible speech. Severe blockage of the arteries to the brain is known as carotid stenosis.

==Stroke==

Carotid artery affects retina, cerebral hemisphere, or both.
Retinal: Transient blackouts; the sense of a shade pulled over the eyes.
Cerebral: Contralateral (opposite sided) paralysis of a single body part; paralysis of one side of the body; localized tingling, numbness; hemianopic visual loss; aphasia (loss of speech); rare loss of consciousness.
Vertebrobasilar: Bilateral visual disturbance including dim, gray, or blurred vision or temporary total blindness; diplopia (double vision).
Labyrinth/medulla: Vertigo; unsteadiness; nausea; vomiting.
Brainstem: Slurring dysarthria (tongue weakness causing impaired speech); dysphagia (difficulty swallowing); numbness, weakness; all four limb paresthesia; drop attacks from sudden loss of postural tone are basilar in origin; a vertebrobasilar artery occlusion episode causes symptoms to be induced by abrupt position changes.

==Causes==

Cerebrovascular disease can be divided into embolism, aneurysms, and low flow states depending on its cause. Major modifiable risk factors include hypertension, smoking, obesity, and diabetes.

==Pathophysiology==

