[[Mamma Mia!]]

CATEGORIES: ABBA, 1999 musicals, Greece in fiction, Broadway musicals, Helpmann Award winning musicals, Jukebox musicals, West End musicals

[tpl]About|the stage musical|the film|Mamma Mia! (film)|the song|Mamma Mia (song)|other uses|Mamma Mia (disambiguation)[tpl]![/tpl]Mamma Mia[/tpl]

Mamma Mia! is a stage musical written by British playwright Catherine Johnson, based on the songs of ABBA, composed by Benny Andersson and Björn Ulvaeus, former members of the band. The title of the musical is taken from the group's 1975 chart-topper "Mamma Mia".  Ulvaeus and Andersson, who composed the original music for ABBA, were involved in the development of the show from the beginning. Anni-Frid Lyngstad has been involved financially in the production and she has also been present at many of the premieres around the world.
The musical includes such hits as "Super Trouper", "Lay All Your Love on Me", "Dancing Queen", "Knowing Me, Knowing You", "Take a Chance on Me", "Thank You for the Music", "Money, Money, Money", "The Winner Takes It All", "Voulez Vous", "SOS" and the title track. Over 54 million people have seen the show, which has grossed $2 billion worldwide since its 1999 debut. A film adaptation starring Meryl Streep, Colin Firth, Pierce Brosnan, Amanda Seyfried, Christine Baranski, Stellan Skarsgård and Julie Walters was released in July 2008.

==Background==

Mamma Mia! is based on the songs of ABBA.  ABBA was a Swedish pop/dance group active from 1972–1982 and was one of the most internationally popular pop groups of all time, topping the charts again and again in Europe, North America and Australia.  Following the premiere of the musical in London in 1999, ABBA Gold topped the charts in the United Kingdom again.  This musical was the brainchild of producer Judy Craymer.  She met songwriters Björn Ulvaeus and Benny Andersson in 1983 when they were working with Tim Rice on Chess.[tpl]Cite journal| last = Craymer  | first = Judy  | title = A Truly Original Musical | journal = Souvenir brochure | date = October 2005  | year = 2004| postscript = [/tpl].  It was the song "The Winner Takes It All" that suggested to her the theatrical potential of their pop songs.[tpl]Cite journal| last = Craymer  | first = Judy  | title = A Truly Original Musical | journal = Souvenir brochure | date = October 2005  | year = 2004| postscript = [/tpl].  The songwriters were not enthusiastic, but they were not completely opposed to the idea.
In 1997, Craymer commissioned Catherine Johnson to write the book for the musical. In 1998, Phyllida Lloyd became the director for the show.  It is unusual for three women to form the collaboration behind a commercial success in musical theatre.

==Productions==

===Original London production===

The musical opened in the West End at the Prince Edward Theatre on 6 April 1999 and
transferred to the Prince of Wales Theatre on 9 June 2004, where it played until September 2012, when it moved to the Novello Theatre.West End's MAMMA MIA! Will Move to the Novello Theatre Directed by Phyllida Lloyd with choreography by Anthony Van Laast, the original cast featured Siobhan McCarthy, Lisa Stokke, and Hilton McRae.'Mamma Mia' listing london-theatreland.co.uk, accessed February 6, 2010" 'Mamma Mia!' review",Billboard, April 10, 1999, accessed February 7, 2010

===Original Broadway production===

Prior to the musical's Broadway engagement, it made its US debut in San Francisco, California, at the Orpheum Theatre from 17 November 2000 to 17 February 2001,Winn, Steven.  "Mamma's' a guilty pleasure for ABBA fans despite its weaknesses", The San Francisco Chronicle, November 18, 2000, p. B1(no author). "TIME OUT; Fyi", Contra Costa Times (California), December 30, 2000, p.D01 moving next to Los Angeles, California, at the Shubert Theatre from 26 February 2001 to 12 May 2001,Welsh, Anne Marie. "Pop musical takes a chance on Abba, and it works", The San Diego Union-Tribune, March 1, 2001, p. E2 and finally to Chicago, Illinois, at the Cadillac Palace Theatre from 13 May 2001 to 12 August 2001."B.O. off; 'Monty' suits up", Variety, LEGIT GROSSES; Road; June 4, 2001 - June 10, 2001, p.30  The musical opened on Broadway at the Winter Garden Theatre on 18 October 2001. The director is Phyllida Lloyd with choreography by Anthony Van Laast. It is currently the ninth longest-running Broadway show. On 18 April 2013 it was announced that Mamma Mia would transfer from its current home at the Winter Garden Theatre to Broadhurst Theatre in late 2013 to make way for the musical adaptation of Rocky.Broadway's Mamma Mia! Will Transfer to The Broadhurst Theatre Retrieved 18 April 2013 The show played its final performance at the Winter Garden Theatre on 19 October 2013 and began performances at the Broadhurst Theatre on 2 November 2013.MAMMA MIA! to Play Final Performance at Winter Garden Theatre on October 19; Begins at Broadhurst on November 2 Retrieved 15 July 2013

===Original Las Vegas production===

Mamma Mia! played in Las Vegas, opening at the Mandalay Bay in February 2003 and closed on 4 January 2009.Weatherford, Mike. "Musical 'Mamma Mia!' rate high in camp value", Las Vegas Review-Journal, 21 February 2003, p. 4JGans, Andrew."Vegas Mamma Mia!, with Johnson, Extends to January 2009". Playbill. 7 January 2008 In June 2005, Mamma Mia!'' played its 1000th performance in Las Vegas, becoming the longest-running West End/Broadway musical in Las Vegas. The clothes and scenarios from this production are now used in Brazil.[tpl]cite book |last=Craymer |first=Judy  |coauthors=Björn Ulvaeus and Benny Andersson |title= Mamma Mia! How Can I Resist You? |year= 2006 |publisher= Littlestar Services|isbn= 0-297-84421-0[/tpl] The show is scheduled to return to Las Vegas in 2014 at The Tropicana Hotel & Casino.

===International and touring productions===

Mamma Mia! has been played in more than 40 countries in all 6 continents, including Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Latvia, Lituania, Malaysia, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, and United States, and has been translated into fourteen languages: German, Japanese, Dutch, Korean, Spanish, Swedish, Flemish, Russian, Norwegian, Italian, Danish, French, Portuguese and Chinese. Over 54 million people have seen the show worldwide and it has set the record for premiering in more cities faster than any other musical in history.
The first city to produce the show after London was Toronto, where it ran from 22 May 2000 to 22 May 2005, being the North America premiere of Mamma Mia!."Long-running Toronto Mamma Mia! to close" playbill.com, 18 de marzo de 2005  The original cast included Louise Pitre as Donna and Tina Maddigan as Sophie, who both of them later reprised their roles in first US Tour and Broadway premiere.
The North American tour started in Providence, Rhode Island in February 2002, and has since played more than 120 cities as of its 6th anniversary in 2008.BWW News Desk." 'Mamma Mia!' US Tour Hits 2500th Show Tonight" broadwayworld.com, February 27, 2008
thumb|left|Mamma Mia! Chinese productionThe first non-English version of the show debuted in Hamburg, where it ran from 3 November 2002 to 8 September 2007. With the productions of Stuttgart (2004) and Essen (2007), Mamma Mia! became the first major musical to play concurrently in three German cities.
The show has had (and in some cases, still has) permanent productions in London, Toronto, Melbourne, New York, Hamburg, Tokyo (later transferred to Osaka, Fukuoka and Nagoya), Las Vegas, Utrecht, Seoul (later transferred to Seongnam and Daegu), Stuttgart, Madrid (later transferred to Barcelona), Stockholm (later transferred to Gothenburg), Antwerp, Moscow, Essen, Berlin, Oslo, Mexico City, Milan (later transferred to Rome), Copenhagen (later transferred to Aarhus), Paris, São Paulo, Shanghai, Buenos Aires, Vienna and Helsinki.
Since its premiere in Dublin on 9 September 2004 (with Helen Hobson as Donna) the international tour has visited more than 74 cities in 35 countries and has been seen by 4.3 million people.  In addition there have been several touring productions worldwide, including Australasia (2002–2005), Australia (2009-2010), China, France (2012-2013), Germany, Japan, Netherlands (2009-2010), North America (since 2002), Spain (2009-2011), South Africa (2010-2011), South Korea and United States (2000-2001).
right|thumb|Mamma Mia! Poster in Glorietta 5 (Jan 2011) to promote the Manila-leg of the International Tour.The Dutch actress Lone van Roosendaal has played Donna in three different countries and in three different languages: Netherlands (Dutch), Belgium (Flemish) and Germany (German).
The South African tour, conducted at the Artscape Theatre in Cape Town on 11 August 2010 and 3 months later at The Teatro, Montecasino in Johannesburg, featured an all local cast.
The Chinese production opened on 11 July 2011 at the Shanghai Grand Theatre and closed on 18 January 2012 at Shanghai Cultural Square afte a small tour, marking the first time that a blockbuster contemporary Western musical were presented in Chinese in Shanghai (there was a previous Chinese production of Beauty and the Beast in Beijing in 1999). It was seen by 250,000 people across six venues, with a total of 190 performances. Shadow Zen played the role of Donna.
On 24 January 2012, Mamma Mia! opened in Manila at the Main Theater of the National Theatre in the Cultural Center of the Philippines as part of the international Tour. The show was originally set to stay only for a week but with the positive response, the organisers decided that it would play until 19 February 2012.http://www.broadwayworld.com/philippines/article/MAMMA-MIA-In-Manila-Extends-Thru-219-20120125 The show features Sara Poyzer as Donna Sheridan and Charlotte Wakefield as Sophie. The cast also included Kate Graham (Tanya), Jenny Dale (Rosie) and David Roberts (Sky).http://www.pep.ph/guide/theater/9478/mamma-mia-will-be-staged-at-the-ccp-from-january-24-february-12-2012
A New Zealand tour production of Mamma Mia opened at the Civic Theatre, Auckland on 4 March 2014, featuring an all new set design by John Harding. International theatre star Deliah Hannah featured as Donna, and popular New Zealand entertainment icon Jackie Clark plays Rosie. The NZ tour will visit 10 cites over 2014-2015.

==Synopsis==

===Act I===

Before the curtain rises, the orchestra starts playing the overture, which is a montage of the instrumental versions of some of ABBA's hit songs.
On the Greek island of Kalokairi, Sophie, a 20-year-old young woman, is preparing to marry her fiancé, Sky. She wants her father to walk her down the aisle, ("Prologue") but does not know who he is. Sophie discovers her mother's old diary and finds entries which describe intimate dates with three men (Sam Carmichael, Bill Austin (Anderson in the film version), and Harry Bright) ("Honey, Honey").  Sophie believes that one of these men is her father and, three months prior to the wedding, sends each an invitation to her wedding writing in the name of her mother, Donna, without letting the unsuspecting mother know.
The day before the wedding, Donna begins receiving guests at her taverna. The first to arrive are her old best friends, Tanya, a rich woman who has been married and divorced three times, and Rosie, an unmarried, carefree woman. The trio used to be a girl group called Donna and the Dynamos. The three women catch up and talk about how their lives have been ("Money, Money, Money").
Later that day, Sophie's three possible fathers arrive: Sam (an American architect), Harry (a British banker), and Bill (originally an Australian writer and adventurer, Swedish in the film, currently American in NY and on tour). Sophie convinces them not to tell Donna that she invited them ("Thank You for the Music"). Donna is surprised to see her ex-lovers ("Mamma Mia") and leaves in tears. Donna, crying, explains to Tanya and Rosie the situation, and they cheer her up ("Chiquitita"). Tanya and Rosie try to convince Donna that she can still be the girl that she once was ("Dancing Queen").
Sophie had hoped that she would know her father the moment she saw him, but is now only confused. She tries to tell her fiancé, Sky, how she feels without confessing what she has done. Sky tells her that he will be the only man she ever needs ("Lay All Your Love on Me").
At Sophie's hen night, Donna and the Dynamos don their old costumes and perform a song, "Super Trouper". Sam, Bill and Harry accidentally walk in on the party, but the guests persuade them to stay ("Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Man After Midnight)"). Sophie first pulls Sam out of the room to talk to him. After he asks why he is here, she is overcome with guilt, and goes to talk to Harry instead. But Harry asks if Sophie's father is at the party, and she tells him the whole truth. Lastly, she draws Bill aside to talk with him. She learns that Bill has an aunt Sophia who left all her money to Donna's family. Bill learns that Donna built the taverna with money she inherited from a friend she lived with when Sophie was a baby; that friend was Bill's aunt. They both think that this means he is her father.
Sophie asks Bill to walk her down the aisle, but Bill wants to discuss it first with Donna. This has been her secret, after all. But no one knows yet that even Donna does not know who the father is, because she slept with the three men in such swift succession. Sophie insists that they must not tell Donna anything ("The Name of the Game") and finally, Bill agrees.
Afterward, everybody crashes the hen party (including the boys from the stag party). During the dance, Sam pulls Sophie aside and tells her that he has figured out why she invited him. He knows that he is her father, and promises to walk her down the aisle the next day. Then, Harry approaches Sophie, apologizing for being so slow on the uptake, and he is also convinced that she is his daughter and promises to walk her down the aisle. Sophie leaves the party, hopelessly confused; she does not want to turn any of them down ("Voulez-Vous").

===Act II===

thumb|right|Mamma Mia! at Broadway On Broadway(Entr'acte) Sophie is having a nightmare, involving her three possible fathers all fighting for the right to walk her down the aisle and wakes up despairing ("Under Attack").
Sophie is upset, and Donna assumes that Sophie wants to cancel the wedding and offers to handle all the details. Sophie is offended and vows that her children will not grow up not knowing who their father is. As Sophie storms out of the room, Sam enters and tries to tell Donna that Sophie may not be all she seems, but Donna will not listen ("One of Us"). She hates Sam; at the end of their affair, she said she never wanted to see him again.  But it seems that Sam was the man Donna cared about the most, and both of them wish they could go back to the start ("SOS"').
At the beach, Harry asks Tanya what the father of the bride ought to be doing for Sophie's wedding. Tanya explains that for her part, her father gave her his advice and then paid. Pepper, one of the guys who works at Donna's taverna, makes advances to Tanya, but she rebuffs him ("Does Your Mother Know").
Sky finds out what Sophie has done in inviting Sam, Harry and Bill to the wedding. He accuses her of wanting a big white wedding only so that she can find out who her father is. He is very hurt that she kept this plan a secret from him. He storms off just as Sam walks in. Sam tries to give Sophie some fatherly advice by describing his failed marriage ("Knowing Me, Knowing You"), but Sophie is not consoled.
Harry offers to Donna to pay for the wedding, and they reminisce about their fling ("Our Last Summer"). Sophie arrives and Donna helps her get dressed. She cannot believe her daughter is going to be a bride ("Slipping Through My Fingers"). Donna admits that her own mother disowned her when she learned that she was pregnant. They reconcile and Sophie asks her mother if she will walk her down the aisle. Sam arrives and tries to speak to Donna again, but she does not want to see him, and asks him to leave. He refuses, and a bitter confrontation ensues. Donna tells Sam that he broke her heart, presumably when she found out he was engaged ("The Winner Takes It All"). It emerges that the two still love each other dearly, albeit against Donna's better judgment.
Rosie is making final preparations in the taverna when Bill arrives. He's upset because he has received a note that Donna will be walking Sophie down the aisle. Bill reaffirms his commitment to the single life, but Rosie has become attracted to him, and urges him to reconsider ("Take a Chance on Me"). They are about to have sex in the taverna, but the guests arrive, leaving Rosie quite stunned.
The wedding begins, with Donna walking Sophie down the aisle. Before the priest has a chance to begin the ceremonies, Donna acknowledges to everyone that Sophie's father is present. Sophie tells her mother that she knows about her father. Donna realizes that Sophie invited them to the wedding for that very reason. The issue of Sophie's parentage is left unsettled, as none of them have any idea whether they are actually her father. Everyone involved agrees that it does not matter which one of them her biological parent is, as Sophie loves all three and they are all happy to be "one-third of a father" and a part of her life at last. Finally, Harry, who has made frequent references to his "other half" throughout the show, is revealed to be in a committed gay relationship.
Suddenly, Sophie calls a halt to the proceedings. She is not ready to get married and Sky agrees with Sophie about not getting married. Sam seizes his chance and proposes to Donna in order to prevent the wedding preparations from going to waste. He explains that he loved her, even when he left to get married. It is revealed that he called off the wedding with his fiancée and came back to the island, only to be told that Donna was going out with another man (Bill). He went back, married his fiancée and had children but he got divorced. Surprisingly, Donna accepts, ("I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do"). In the end, Sam and Donna are married, and at the end of the night, Sophie and Sky depart on a round-the-world tour ("I Have A Dream") .

===Finale and Encore===

After the usual performers' bows to the audience, the cast performs the following songs together:  "Mamma Mia", "Dancing Queen" and "Waterloo", featuring Donna, Tanya, Rosie, Sam, Bill, and Harry in ABBA-inspired costumes; they often invite the audience to clap, dance, and sing along.

==Musical numbers==

===Notes on the music===

During the preview period in London, the musical had the song "Summer Night City" just after the prologue. The "Summer Night City" scene was a wedding rehearsal and during the song, Ali, Lisa, Tanya, and Rosie arrived on the island. Now, part of the song is used as underscoring to connect the end of "The Winner Takes It All" and "Take a Chance on Me". You can also hear a couple of lines of "Summer Night City" in the 'Entr'acte' (the most noticeable line is: 'Time to breathe and time to live').
Donna hums a few lines of "Fernando", when she repairs the doors of the taverna just before she sees her three former lovers. In the Mexican production Donna sings a few lines of the original ABBA's Spanish version of the song.
In the German production, Sky (Bernhard Forcher) sang a few lines of "King Kong Song" before starting "Lay All Your Love on Me". In the international tour version, Sky (David Roberts) sings a few lines of "She's My Kind of Girl", a Björn & Benny song.
The wedding march that is played as Sophie walks down the aisle is a slower arrangement of "Dancing Queen".
The creators also intended to include "Just Like That", an unreleased ABBA song recorded in 1982. The song was apparently dropped just before the first public previews in March 1999, though it was listed in the program available during the preview period.
The last three songs, performed as an encore/finale by the whole cast are: "Mamma Mia", "Dancing Queen" and "Waterloo". The version of "Mamma Mia" used in the encore/finale is sung by the Company. The finale song Mamma Mia has been extended in theatres where Donna and the Dynamos had to go downstairs for taking the stage lift in Dancing Queen. Then, during the intro of "Dancing Queen", Donna, Tanya and Rosie join the Company (as the girl-power band "Donna and the Dynamos", wearing the ABBA's 70's colorful and flashy costumes). Sam, Bill and Harry join them during Waterloo, wearing male versions of the girls' ABBA's costumes. The Encore is included on the 5th Anniversary Cast Recording (commemorating said anniversary for the Broadway production).
In the Brazilian production, all the three songs from the encore/finale were kept in English. Though "Waterloo" was adapted into Brazilian Portuguese, this version was never used and the lyrics are unknown.
In the Russian production the song "Happy New Year" is sung at the encore on New Year holidays shows.

==Principal roles and cast==

==Film adaptation==

Mamma Mia! was adapted as a film, produced by Judy Craymer and Gary Goetzman, written by Catherine Johnson directed by Phyllida Lloyd and with Tom Hanks, Rita Wilson, Björn Ulvaeus, and Benny Andersson as executive producers. Meryl Streep stars as Donna Sheridan and Amanda Seyfried as Sophie and Pierce Brosnan as Sam Carmichael. The movie also features Christine Baranski, Dominic Cooper, Colin Firth, Stellan Skarsgård and Julie Walters. It premiered July 18, 2008 in the US.  Most of the songs remained intact with the exceptions of "Under Attack", "One of Us", "Knowing Me, Knowing You", and "Thank You for the Music". "Knowing Me, Knowing You" was used as the wedding music and "Thank You for the Music" is sung during the second half of the end credits. The first half is occupied with a "Dancing Queen" reprise and "Waterloo", with a "Mamma Mia" reprise and "I Have a Dream" sung before the credits (though the latter is sung as Sophie mails the invitations at the start of the film). "When All Is Said and Done", a song not used in the musical, was added for the film sung by Sam, Donna, and the company. "Our Last Summer" was used earlier in the movie, with Sophie, Bill, Sam, and Harry singing it. "The Name of the Game", while filmed, was subsequently edited out of the film for the final cut.  The song is included in full on the motion picture soundtrack  - an abbreviated version of the song and scene appear on the DVD/Blu-ray as a supplement. In addition, "Thank You for the Music" is used as a hidden track, and is performed by Amanda Seyfried (Sophie).

==Awards and nominations==

===Original London production===

===Original Broadway production===

==Response==

On any given day, there are at least seven performances of Mamma Mia! being performed around the globe. On May 15, 2005, Mamma Mia! surpassed the original Broadway runs of The Sound of Music, The King and I, and Damn Yankees with 1,500 performances.  On September 14, 2011, it surpassed Miss Saigon to become the 10th longest-running Broadway musical of all time with 4,098 performances.
MAMMA MIA! Becomes 10th Longest Running Musical in History Today, Sept. 14[tpl]Cite web|url=http://www.playbill.com/news/article/120976.html |title=Mamma Mia! to Become 16th-Longest Running Show on Broadway |accessdate=2008-09-08|publisher=Playbill, Inc.|date=2008-09-04|author=Gans, Andrew|work=[/tpl] When Mamma Mia! opened in Russia, it received a very positive response.Brown, Isemene. "Mamma Mia! Moscow falls for Abba." The Daily Telegraph. 18 October 2006. Retrieved on 29 October 2011. As of January 2008 "Mamma Mia!" became the longest daily running show in the history of Russian theatre.

==References==

==External links==


