[[Knitting]]

CATEGORIES: Arts and crafts, Crafts, Knitting, Sheep wool, Woolen clothing

Knitting is a method by which thread or yarn is used to create a cloth.
Knitted fabric consists of a number of consecutive rows of loops, called stitches.  As each row progresses, a new loop is pulled through an existing loop.  The active stitches are held on a needle until another loop can be passed through them.  This process eventually results in a fabric, often used for blankets or garments.
Knitting may be done by hand or by machine. There exist numerous styles and methods of hand knitting.
Different types of yarns and needles may be used to achieve a plethora of knitted materials; these tools give the final piece a different colour, texture, weight, and/or integrity. Other factors that affect the end result include the needle's shape, thickness and malleability, as well as the yarn's fibre type, texture and twist.

==Structure==

===Courses and wales===

Like weaving, knitting is a technique for producing a two-dimensional fabric made from a one-dimensional yarn or thread.  In weaving, threads are always straight, running parallel either lengthwise (warp threads) or crosswise (weft threads).  By contrast, the yarn in knitted fabrics follows a meandering path (a course), forming symmetric loops (also called bights) symmetrically above and below the mean path of the yarn.  These meandering loops can be easily stretched in different directions giving knit fabrics much more elasticity than woven fabrics.  Depending on the yarn and knitting pattern, knitted garments can stretch as much as 500%.  For this reason, knitting was initially developed for garments that must be elastic or stretch in response to the wearer's motions, such as socks and hosiery.  For comparison, woven garments stretch mainly along one direction (the bias) and are not very elastic, unless they are woven from stretchable material such as spandex.  Knitted garments are often more form-fitting than woven garments, since their elasticity allows them to contour to the body's outline more closely; by contrast, curvature is introduced into most woven garments only with sewn darts, flares, gussets and gores, the seams of which lower the elasticity of the woven fabric still further.  Extra curvature can be introduced into knitted garments without seams, as in the heel of a sock; the effect of darts, flares, etc. can be obtained with short rows or by increasing or decreasing the number of stitches.  Thread used in weaving is usually much finer than the yarn used in knitting, which can give the knitted fabric more bulk and less drape than a woven fabric.
If they are not secured, the loops of a knitted course will come undone when their yarn is pulled; this is known as ripping out, unravelling knitting, or humorously, frogging (because you 'rip it', this sounds like a frog croaking: 'rib-bit').[tpl]cite web|url=http://knitty.com/ISSUEwinter03/FEATwin03TT.html|title=Techniques with Theresa, Frog pond edition[/tpl]  To secure a stitch, at least one new loop is passed through it.  Although the new stitch is itself unsecured ("active" or "live"), it secures the stitch(es) suspended from it.  A sequence of stitches in which each stitch is suspended from the next is called a wale.A wale, according to Knitting Technology: a Comprehensive Handbook and Practical Guide, is "a predominantly vertical column of needle loops generally produced by the same needles at successive (not necessarily all) knitting cycles. A wale starts as soon as an empty needle starts to knit" (Spencer 1989:17).  To secure the initial stitches of a knitted fabric, a method for casting on is used; to secure the final stitches in a wale, one uses a method of binding/casting off.  During knitting, the active stitches are secured mechanically, either from individual hooks (in knitting machines) or from a knitting needle or frame in hand-knitting.

===Weft and warp knitting===

There are two major varieties of knitting: weft knitting and warp knitting.[ref]
