[[New College, Toronto]]

CATEGORIES: University of Toronto, University of Toronto buildings, Modernist architecture in Canada

New College is one of the four constituent Colleges of the University of Toronto in Canada.  One of the larger colleges with nearly 5000 students, it stands on Huron Street in the historic campus' west-end, nestled alongside the Athletic Centre, the Earth Sciences Centre, Sidney Smith Hall and the Ramsey Wright Zoology Laboratory. The university press, the Window, is a member of CUP.

==History==

Founded in 1962, New College was the first college to be created within the University of Toronto since the federation with Victoria, Trinity and St. Michael's Colleges.  The name of the College was initially to be "New King's College," an homage to University College, which had been known as King's College before receiving new royal charter.

==Namesake cousins==

New College shares with Trinity College, St. Hilda's College, and University College, the distinction of being Dominion cousins to namesakes in the UK.  It is named after New College at the University of Oxford, in Britain, upon which the College system at the University of Toronto is itself modelled.

==Character==

Designed under the "multi-faculty" concept, 4,500 of its students are from the Faculty of Arts & Science with the rest drawn from Applied Science & Engineering, Physical Education and Health, Music, and Pharmacy. In fact, what is now known as Innis College, the second "multi-faculty" college, was originally designed as another wing onto New College before it was built separately in 1964.
Housed in an integrated "serpentine" design, New College consists of three halls: Wilson Hall, Wetmore Hall, and a new hall aptly named New Building built in 2003. Employing an integrated approach to living, 857 living units are built in the upper floors; the lower floors include the library and reading room, computer labs, staff offices and lecture theatres, dining halls, and recreation lounges. The New Building also has the William Doo Auditorium and a mini-gym.
New College is most attractive to students who wish to live near many of the central facilities of University of Toronto such as Robarts Library, Sidney Smith Hall, the Athletic Centre, and the Lash-Miller chemical laboratories. Recently, with the newly finished New College Residence Hall garnering design awards for its red-bricked nod to New Urbanism, the College is an attractive home to university life in the campus' west-end.

==Student life==

New College boasts an extremely multi-cultural student body, with more than three-quarters of its students drawn from the ranks of new Canadians.  Both the Residence Student's Council (serving students who live at the college) and the New College Student Council (serving both residents and commuters) plan activities which highlight the college's diversity. A highlight of the year, usually held in the winter term, is Mosaic. Mosaic is an evening of music, dance and performance, featuring multi-ethnic themes. The Student Council generally uses the William Doo Auditorium for Mosaic, and also for other events such as movie nights, musical concerts, and miscellaneous themed nights such as Casino Night.
For students in residence at New College, their social life is aided by their floor residence council. The floor residence council organizes restaurant trips, movie nights, field trips (trapeze training, rock climbing, bowling, etc.) and other activities. Each residence floor is benefited by its don. New College dons are graduate students who live with the undergraduates and provide advice and support to the students. The New College Residence Council oversees student life specifically for students who live in residence.
Residence student life is also anchored largely around the college's cafeteria, whose food services are run by the privately owned Aramark company. The dining area is quite large, with a number of different foods available at each mealtime. Vegetarian, Vegan and Halal (though not Kosher) meals are offered, though students may need to request these items at each meal.
In 2008 the College replaced the Dean of Residence position with a new Director of Student Life.  This senior administrator is charged not only with running the residence operation but developing student life programming that integrates the over three thousand commuting students into the larger New College community.  In addition, the College's social justice and equity mandate is now woven through many of its extra-curricular programs, a development furthered by the 2009 appointment of a service learning coordinator.

==Specialization==

New College pursues a mandate around equity and social justice—and most of its programs, such as African Studies, Caribbean Studies, Equity Studies, and Women and Gender Studies reflect this mission.  The College continues to maintain its connections with the field of engineering and the life sciences. Many of its early officers were from science backgrounds, including Wilson from Engineering and Ivey from Medicine. Today, like many of the colleges at the University of Toronto, it co-ordinates a number of academic degree programmes, Human Biology being an especially prominent program for aspiring MD's.

==New Faces==

The New Faces Drama Society has been a traditional part of New College student life for years. The Society was recently resurrected during the 2009-2010 school year after disappearing around 2005. This new group of students, led by Jameson Glas reformed New Faces with a few minor productions in the hopes that future New College students would keep the tradition going strong. These productions included a murder mystery and a New College Drama Festival which featured three student written, directed and acted one-act plays. One of these one-act plays was also featured in the Hart House Drama Festival.

==References==

==External links==


