[[Luís I of Portugal]]

CATEGORIES: Portuguese monarchs, Portuguese infantes, Portuguese royalty, Kohary family, Knights of the Garter, Knights of the Golden Fleece, Recipients of the Royal Order of Kamehameha I, 1838 births, 1889 deaths, Dukes of Porto, 19th-century Portuguese people, Burials at the Monastery of São Vicente de Fora, Grand Masters of the Order of the Immaculate Conception of Vila Viçosa, Knights of the Order of the Most Holy Annunciation, People from Lisbon, Constables of Portugal

Luís I ([tpl]IPA-pt|luˈiʃ[/tpl]; [tpl]Lang-en|Louis I[/tpl], Full name: Luís Filipe Maria Fernando Pedro de Alcântara António Miguel Rafael Gabriel Gonzaga Xavier Francisco de Assis João Augusto Júlio Valfando de Saxe-Coburgo-Gotha e Bragança, the Popular, Port. o Popular; Lisbon, 31 October 1838 – 19 October 1889 in Cascais) was the King of Portugal and the Algarves between 1861 and 1889. He was the second son of Maria II and Ferdinand II and was created Duke of Porto and Viseu.
Luís was a cultured man who wrote vernacular poetry, but had no distinguishing gifts in the political field into which he was thrust by the deaths of his brothers Pedro V and Fernando in 1861. Luís's domestic reign was a tedious and ineffective series of transitional governments called Rotativism formed at various times by the Progressistas (Liberals) and the Regeneradores (Conservatives – the party generally favoured by King Luís, who secured their long term in office after 1881).  Despite a flirtation with the Spanish succession prior to the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71, Luís's reign was otherwise one of domestic stagnation as Portugal fell ever further behind the nations of western Europe in terms of public education, political stability, technological progress and economic prosperity.  In colonial affairs, Delagoa Bay was confirmed as a Portuguese possession in 1875, whilst Belgian activities in the Congo (1880s) and a British Ultimatum in 1890 denied Portugal a land link between Portuguese Angola and Portuguese Mozambique at the peak of the Scramble for Africa.
Luís was mostly a man of the sciences, with a passion for oceanography. He invested great amounts of his fortune in funding research boats to collect specimens in the oceans of the world. He was responsible for the establishment of one of the World's first Aquariums, Aquário Vasco da Gama in Lisbon, which is still open to the public with its vast collection of maritime life forms, including a 10 meter long squid. His love for sciences and things new was passed to his two sons.

==Marriages and descendants==

Luís married Princess Maria Pia of Savoy, daughter of Victor Emmanuel II of Italy and Maria Adelaide of Austria. The both had a deep love at first, but Luis's countless mistresses lead Maria Pia to depression. Together they had two sons who survived childhood, and a stillborn son in 1866. Maria Pia also gave birth to another stillborn son in 1869, and suffered miscarriages in 1872 and 1879.  The King also fathered one illegitimate child, born in 1874 in Lisbon, a son named Carlos Augusto.
Ancestry

|-


