[[Colegio Americano de Quito]]

CATEGORIES: High schools in Quito, Schools in Ecuador, International Baccalaureate schools in Ecuador, International schools in Ecuador, Private schools in Ecuador, Educational institutions established in 1940

The Fundación Colegio Americano de Quito or Colegio Americano de Quito (American School of Quito) is a  private college preparatory school in Quito, Ecuador. It was founded by the former president of Ecuador and the president of the Organization of American States (OAS) Galo Plaza Lasso in 1940.
The American School of Quito opened its doors on October 14, 1940 to 162 students. The first directors were Robert E. and Mrs. Hazel J. Tucker, who had just arrived from the United States. The founders of the school lived in a time characterized by the fascist movements in Europe, represented in Ecuador and other South American nations by the German and Italian schools operating there. The two founders wanted to counter this. They had a vision of educating the youth of Ecuador in democratic values knowing these students would become the future leaders.
Th American School has 2,116 students from Pre-Kindergarten to Twelfth Grade. Among these students are the children and grandchildren of founding families. The school is co-educational, non-religious and is a non-profit foundation. It is accredited by AdvancED and the Ecuadorian Ministry of Education and Culture. It is recognized by the International Baccalaureate Organization and offers both I.B. Programmes: Middle Years and Diploma. American School graduates can obtain three diplomas: a high school diploma accredited in the United States, the Ecuadorian Bachillerato and the I.B. Diploma.

==Student Council==

Every year students from high school vote for the Student Council. The student Council is a group of representatives for high school that run activities and organize events. Candidates from the Student Council come from 10th (Secretary), 11th (Vice-President) and 12th grade (President and Treasurer).

==Model United Nations==

The School hosts the largest Model United Nations in Spanish each year, which include local schools, thus contributing to the practice of democratic principles and the analysis of global and local issues in Ecuador.

==Notable alumni==

==External links==

==Bibliography==

"Ecuador to Get New U.S. School", New York Times, 29 September 1940, section 2, p. 5. col. 8.

