[[Governor of South Carolina]]

CATEGORIES: Governors of South Carolina, State constitutional officers of South Carolina

The Governor of the State of South Carolina is the head of state for the State of South Carolina. Under the South Carolina Constitution, the Governor is also the head of government, serving as the chief executive of the South Carolina executive branch. The Governor is the ex officio Commander-in-Chief of the National Guard when not called into Federal use. The Governor's responsibilities include making yearly "State of the State" addresses to the South Carolina General Assembly, submitting an executive budget and ensuring that state laws are enforced
The 116th and current Governor of South Carolina is Nikki Haley, who is in her first term after being elected in 2010.  Haley defeated Democratic candidate Vincent Sheheen in the November 2010 midterm elections. Haley is the first female and first minority governor in the state's history.

==Requirements to hold office==

There are three legal requirements set forth in Section 2 of Article IV of the South Carolina Constitution. (1) Belief in the existence of a Supreme Being.  (2) Be at least 30 years of age. (3) Citizen of the United States and a resident of South Carolina for 5 years preceding the day of election. The first is thought to be unenforceable.The South Carolina Governance ProjectSouth Carolina Constitution Article IV

==Term(s) of office==

Under Section 4 in Article IV of the South Carolina Constitution, the Governor serves a four-year term in office beginning at noon on the first Wednesday following the second Tuesday in January next after his or her election and ending at noon on the first Wednesday following the second Tuesday in January four years later.  Section 3 of Article IV states that no person shall be elected Governor for more than two successive terms. It makes no reference to limits of the total number of terms held.

==Powers==

==Succession==

If the governor resigns, dies, fails to qualify, cannot perform duties or is removed from office, then the lieutenant governor will become governor. During impeachment or when the governor is temporarily disabled or absent from office, then the lieutenant governor will have the powers of the governor. The current chain of succession is:
If all three are unable to be Governor, then the General Assembly will elect a new Governor.

==Oath of office==

"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am duly qualified, according to the Constitution of this State, to exercise the duties of the office to which I have been elected, (or appointed), and that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the duties thereof, and preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of this State and of the United States. So help me God."

==Official residence==

The Governor's Mansion, located at 800 Richland Street in Columbia, on Arsenal Hill, is the official residence of the Governor of South Carolina. It was built in 1855 and became the official residence of the Governor in 1868. The South Carolina Constitution in Section 20 of Article IV specifies that the Governor is to reside where the General Assembly convenes.

==History==

The South Carolina Constitution of 1776 specified for the Governor (known as the President) to be chosen by the General Assembly. In 1778, the constitution was amended to change the title for the chief of the executive branch from President to Governor.
A new constitution was promulgated in 1865 following the capture of the state by the Union Army in the Civil War. It called for the direct election of the Governor, but continued to limit the vote to white males. On October 18, 1865, James Lawrence Orr was the first Governor of South Carolina to be elected by popular vote.
Following the state's failure to adopt the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution, the US Congress eliminated all offices of state government. A temporary military government headed by Edward Canby was set up until new elections were held after the writing of the Constitution of 1868. All male citizens above the age of 21, regardless of race, were given the right to vote and the Governor was allowed to be elected to two consecutive terms.
The election of Ben Tillman in 1890 to Governor by the support of agrarian reformers forced a new constitutional convention to be held. The constitution of 1895 instituted a poll tax and also required voters to pass a literacy test. It did increase the Governor's powers by granting a line-item veto on the budget.
In 1926, an amendment to the constitution was passed that lengthened the Governor's term to 4 years, but prevented consecutive terms. Governor Richard Riley pushed for an amendment to allow for two consecutive terms and it was passed by the voters in 1980.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


