[[Dimension of an algebraic variety]]

CATEGORIES: Algebraic varieties, Dimension, Computer algebra

In mathematics and specifically in algebraic geometry, the dimension of an algebraic variety may be defined in various equivalent ways. 
Some of these definitions are of geometric nature, while some other are purely algebraic and rely on commutative algebra. Some are restricted to algebraic varieties while others apply also to any algebraic set. Some are intrinsic, as independent of any embedding of the variety into an affine or projective space, while other are related to such an embedding.

==Dimension of an affine algebraic set==

This definition generalizes a property of the dimension of a Euclidean space or a vector space. It is  thus probably the definition that gives the easiest intuitive description of the notion. 
This definition shows that the dimension is a local property.
This shows that the dimension is constant on a variety
This relies the dimension of a variety to that of a differentiable manifold. More precisely, if V if defined over the reals, then the set of its real regular points is a differentiable manifold that has the same dimension as variety and as a manifold.
This is the algebraic analogue to the fact that a connected manifold has a constant dimension.
This definition is not intrinsic as it apply only to algebraic sets that are explicitly embedded in an affine or projective space.
This the algebraic translation of the preceding definition.
This is the algebraic translation of the fact that the intersection of n-d hypersurfaces is, in general, an algebraic set of dimension d. 
This allows, through a Gröbner basis computation to compute the dimension of the algebraic set defined by a given system of polynomial equations
This allows to prove easily that the dimension is invariant under birational equivalence.

==Dimension of a projective algebraic set==

All the definitions of the previous section apply, with the change that, when A or I appear explicitly in the definition, the value of the dimension must be reduced by one. For example, the dimension of V is one less than the Krull dimension of A.

==Computation of the dimension==

Given a system of polynomial equations, it may be difficult to compute the dimension of the algebraic set that it defines. 
Without further information on the system, there is only one practical method that consists to compute a Gröbner basis and to deduce the degree of the denominator of the Hilbert series of the ideal generated by the equations. 
This algorithm is implemented in several computer algebra systems. For example in Maple, this is the function GroebnerHilbertDimension.

==Real dimension==

The real dimension of a real algebraic set is the dimension (as algebraic set) of its Zariski closure. It is equal to the maximum of the dimensions of the manifolds contained in the set of the real points of the algebraic set.
The real dimension is more difficult to compute than the algebraic dimension, and, to date, there is no available software to compute it.

==See also==

==External links==


