[[Xianfeng Emperor]]

CATEGORIES: 1831 births, 1861 deaths, 19th-century Chinese monarchs, Emperors from Beijing, People listed in Hummel's Eminent Chinese of the Ch'ing Period, Qing dynasty emperors

The Xianfeng Emperor (Wade-Giles: Hsien-feng Emperor; [tpl]lang-zh|咸豐帝[/tpl], pinyin: Xiánfēngdì;  17 July 1831[tpl]spaced ndash[/tpl]22 August 1861), born Aisin-Gioro I Ju, was the ninth Emperor of the Qing Dynasty, and the seventh Qing emperor to rule over China, from 1850 to 1861.

==Family and early life==

Yizhu was born in 1831 at the Imperial Summer Palace Complex, 8 kilometers northwest of the walls of Beijing, and was the fourth son of the Daoguang Emperor. His mother was the Imperial Consort Quan (全貴妃), of the (Manchu) Niuhuru clan, who was made Empress in 1834, and is known posthumously as Empress Xiaoquancheng (孝全成皇后).
Yizhu was reputed to have an ability in literature and administration which surpassed most of his brothers, which impressed his father Daoguang Emperor who therefore decided to make him his successor.

==Early reign==

Yizhu succeeded the throne in 1850, at age 19, and was a relatively young Emperor. He inherited a dynasty that faced not only internal but also foreign challenges. Yizhu's reign title, Xianfeng (咸丰/咸豐), which means "Universal Prosperity", did not reflect the situation. In 1850 the first of a series of popular rebellions began that would nearly destroy the dynasty. The Taiping Rebellion began in December 1850, when Hong Xiuquan, a Hakka leader of a syncretic Christian sect, defeated local forces sent to disperse his followers. Hong then proclaimed the establishment of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom and the rebellion spread to several provinces with amazing speed. The next year the Nien Rebellion started in North China. Unlike the Christian Taipings', the Nien movement lacked a clear political program, but they became a serious threat to Beijing with the mobility of their cavalry-based armies. Fixed between two powerful forces the Qing suffered repeated defeats.

==Rebellions and Wars==

In 1853 the Taiping captured Nanjing and for a while it seemed that Beijing would fall next; but the Taiping northern expedition was defeated and the situation stabilized. Xianfeng dispatched several prominent mandarins, like Zeng Guofan, and Imperial relatives, like the Mongol general Sengge Rinchen, to crush the rebellions, but they only obtained limited success. The biggest revolt of the Miao people against Chinese rule in history started in 1854, and ravaged the region until finally put down in 1873. In 1856 an attempt to regain Nanjing was defeated and the Panthay Rebellion broke out in Yunnan.
Meanwhile, an initially minor incident on the coasts triggered the Second Opium War. Anglo-French forces, after inciting a few battles (not all victories for them) on the coast near Tianjin, attempted "negotiation" with the Qing Government. Xianfeng, under the influence of the Concubine Yi (懿貴妃, later the Empress Dowager Cixi), believed in Chinese superiority and would not agree to any colonial demands. He delegated Prince Gong for several negotiations but relations broke down completely when a British diplomatic envoy, Sir Harry Parkes, was arrested during negotiations on 18 September.
The Anglo-French invasion clashed with Sengge Rinchen's Mongolian cavalry on 18 September near Zhangjiawan before proceeding toward the outskirts of Beijing for a decisive battle in Tongzhou District, Beijing. On 21 September, at the Battle of Palikao, Sengge Rinchen's 10,000 troops, including élite Mongolian cavalry, were completely annihilated after several doomed frontal charges against the concentrated firepower of the Anglo-French forces, which entered Beijing on 6 October.
On 18 October 1860, the western forces went on to loot and burn the Imperial Summer Palaces of Qīngyī Yuán (清漪园/清漪園) and Yuánmíng Yuán (圆明园/圓明園). Upon learning about this news, Xianfeng's health quickly deteriorated.
During Xianfengs's reign, China lost part of Manchuria to Russia. In 1858, according to the treaty of Aigun, the territory between Stanovoy Mountains and Amur River was ceded to Russia, and in 1860, according to the treaty of Peking, the same thing happened also to the area east of Ussuri River. After that treaty, Russians founded the city of Vladivostok in the area they had annexed.
While negotiations with the European powers were being held, Emperor Xianfeng and his Imperial entourage fled to the northern palace in Jehol in the name of annual Imperial hunt. As his health worsened, Xianfeng's ability to govern also deteriorated, and competing court ideologies in court led to the formation of two distinct factions — one under the rich Manchu Sushun, Princes Yi and Zheng, and the other under the Concubine Yi, supported by Gen. Ronglu and Yehenala Bannermen.

==Death==

Xianfeng died on 22 August 1861, from a short life of overindulgence, at the imperial summer resort (行宮 xinggong) in Jehol, 230 kilometers northeast of Beijing. His successor was his one surviving six-year-old son, Zaichun. A day before his death, Xianfeng had summoned Sushun and his group to his bedside and gave them an Imperial Edict that dictated the power structure during the young Emperor's minority. The edict appointed four members of the Imperial line (Zaiyuan: the Prince Yi; Duanhua; the Prince Zheng; Duke Jingshou; Sushun) and four Ministers: (Muyin, Kuangyuan, Du Han, and Jiao Youying) as the eight members of a new regency council to aid the young Emperor. By tradition, after the death of an Emperor, the body was to be accompanied to the Capital by the regents. Concubine Yi and the Empress, who were now both given titles of Empress Dowager, traveled ahead to Beijing and planned a coup that ousted Sushun from the regency. The Concubine Yi would subsequently rule China for the next 47 years, as the Empress Dowager Cixi.
Emperor Xianfeng was interred in the Eastern Qing Tombs (清東陵), 125 kilometers/75 miles east of Beijing, in the Dingling (定陵  "Tomb of Quietude") mausoleum complex.

==Legacy==

Xianfeng's reign saw the continued decline of the Qing dynasty. Rebellions in the country, which began the first year of his reign, would not be quelled until well into the reign of the Tongzhi Emperor and resulted in millions of deaths. Xianfeng also had to deal with the British and French and their ever growing appetite to expand trade further into China. Xianfeng, like his father, the Daoguang Emperor, understood very little about Europeans and their mindset. While Westerners often saw different nations as equals deserving mutual respect as an international norm[tpl]Citation needed|date=March 2012[/tpl], Xianfeng viewed non-Chinese Europeans as inferior and regarded the Europeans' repeated requests to be treated as equal as an offence. When the Europeans introduced the long-held concept of an exchanged consular relationship, Xianfeng quickly rebuffed the idea.
During the Second Opium War, repeated requests by Europeans to meet Xianfeng were also denied. At the time of Xianfeng's death, he had not met with any foreign dignitary.

==Family==

The Xianfeng Emperor had a large sexual appetite. He was a lover of opera and alcohol, and often became violent with his servants. He was known to smoke opium.连载：正说清朝十二帝 SINA

==Ancestry==

==See also==

==References==

==Sources and literature==

Books about Empress Dowager Cixi:


