[[Naruhito, Crown Prince of Japan]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, Living people, People from Tokyo, Alumni of Merton College, Oxford, Gakushuin University alumni, Japanese princes, Grand Cordons of the Order of the Chrysanthemum, Grand Crosses of the Order of Charles III, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St. Olav, Knights of the Elephant, Knights of the Royal Order of the Seraphim, Recipients of the Grand Decoration with Sash for Services to the Republic of Austria, Recipients of the Order of Khalifa (Bahrain), Grand Crosses of the Order of the Crown (Netherlands)

|-
|[tpl]Japanese Imperial Family[/tpl]
|}
[tpl]nihongo|Naruhito, Crown Prince of Japan|皇太子徳仁親王|Kōtaishi Naruhito Shinnō|extra=born 23 February 1960[/tpl] is the eldest son of Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko, which makes him the heir apparent to the Chrysanthemum Throne of Japan.

==Early life==

Naruhito was born on February 23, 1960 in a makeshift hospital on the grounds of the palace.  The prince later quipped, "I was born in a barn inside the moat"Hills, Ben. Princess Masako: Prisoner of the Chrysanthemum Throne, p. 69.
Naruhito's childhood was reported to be happy, and he enjoyed such diverse hobbies as music, mountain climbing, and riding.  He played with the children of the royal chamberlain, and he was a fan of the Yomiuri Giants in the Central Baseball League, his favorite player being No. 3-turned-team manager Shigeo Nagashima. One day, Naruhito found the remains of an ancient roadway on the palace grounds, sparking a lifelong fascination with the history of transportation, which would provide the subject of his bachelor's and master's degrees in history.Hills, Ben. Princess Masako: Prisoner of the Chrysanthemum Throne, p. 76. He later said, "I have had a keen interest in roads since childhood. On roads you can go to the unknown world. Since I have been leading a life where I have few chances to go out freely, roads are a precious bridge to the unknown world, so to speak."Hills, Ben. Princess Masako: Prisoner of the Chrysanthemum Throne, p. 77.
In August 1974, when the prince was 14, he was sent to Melbourne, Australia for a homestay. Naruhito's father, then the Crown Prince Akihito, had had a positive experience there on a trip the year before and encouraged his son to go as well.Hills, Ben (2006). Princess Masako: Prisoner of the Chrysanthemum Throne. London; New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher/Penguin. p. 56. ISBN 1-58542-568-0. OCLC 76074219. He stayed with the family of businessman Colin Harper.Hills, Ben. Princess Masako: Prisoner of the Chrysanthemum Throne, p. 57. He got along with his host brothers, riding around Point Lonsdale, playing violin and tennis, and climbing Uluru together.Hills, Ben. Princess Masako: Prisoner of the Chrysanthemum Throne, p. 60-61. Once he even played violin for dignitaries at a state dinner at Government House hosted by Governor-General Sir John Kerr.Hills, Ben. Princess Masako: Prisoner of the Chrysanthemum Throne, p. 60.

==Education==

When Naruhito was four years old he was enrolled in the prestigious Gakushuin school system, where many of Japan's elite families and nouveaux riches send their children.Hills, Ben. Princess Masako: Prisoner of the Chrysanthemum Throne, p. 77-78. In senior high Naruhito joined the geography club.Hills, Ben. Princess Masako: Prisoner of the Chrysanthemum Throne, p. 79.
Naruhito graduated from Gakushuin in 1982 with a bachelor's degree in history.Hills, Ben. Princess Masako: Prisoner of the Chrysanthemum Throne, p. 81.  In July of the next year he entered a three-month intensive English course before entering Merton College, Oxford University in England,Hills, Ben. Princess Masako: Prisoner of the Chrysanthemum Throne, pp. 142-143, 152. where he would study until 1986. Naruhito would not, however, submit his thesis A Study of Navigation and Traffic on the Upper Thames in the 18th Century until 1989.Hills, Ben. Princess Masako: Prisoner of the Chrysanthemum Throne, p.144-145 He later revisited these years in his book, The Thames and I--a Memoir of Two Years at Oxford.
