[[Michael Albert]]

CATEGORIES: 1947 births, American activists, American anti-war activists, American economists, American libertarians, American magazine editors, American memoirists, American political writers, American anarchists, Anti-corporate activists, Cooperative organisers, International Organization for a Participatory Society, Libertarian socialists, Living people, Members of Students for a Democratic Society (1960 organization), Recipients of the Medal of the Presidency of the Italian Republic, Alpha Epsilon Pi brothers

Michael Albert (born April 8, 1947) is an American activist, economist, speaker, and writer. 
During the 1960s, he was a member of Students for a Democratic Society, and was active in the anti-Vietnam War movement. He is co-editor of ZNet, and co-editor and co-founder of Z Magazine. He also co-founded South End Press and has written numerous books and articles. 
Albert identifies himself as a market abolitionistMarket Madness. Z-Mag, 13 July 2004.  and favors participatory planning as an alternative.Albert, Michael There Is An Alternative. ZNet, July 27, 2005. He developed, with Robin Hahnel, the economic vision called participatory economics. Albert has also been a moving force in the creation of the International Organization for a Participatory Society founded in 2012.
Albert's memoir, Remembering Tomorrow: From SDS to Life After Capitalism (ISBN 1583227423), was published in 2007 by Seven Stories Press.
Parecomic: the story of Michael Albert and Participatory Economics (2013) Seven Stories Press is a graphic novel account of Albert's life and the Parecon ideas, by Sean Michael Wilson and Carl Thompson,with an introduction by Noam Chomsky. In the afterword, before describing Parecon, Albert writes of present-day capitalism: "At this point of the twenty-first century, only a relatively few people...fail to see that capitalism is now a gigantic holocaust of injustice."Parecomic, pp 228-9

==Books==

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


