[[Seattle Pilots]]

CATEGORIES: Seattle Pilots, Milwaukee Brewers, Sports in Seattle, Washington

The Seattle Pilots were an American professional baseball team based in Seattle, Washington for one season, [tpl]by|1969[/tpl]. The Pilots played  home games at Sicks' Stadium and were a member of the West Division of Major League Baseball's American League. On April 1, 1970, they moved to Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and changed their name to the Brewers.
The team's name originated from the owner's part-time job as a harbor pilot and the city's association with the airplane industry."Seattle Post-Intelligencer," 10 March 1968 and Bill Mullins, Becoming Big League, p. 105  The team colors were red, navy blue, and gold. Seattle had long been a hotbed for minor league baseball and was home to the Seattle Rainiers, a successful team in the Pacific Coast League (PCL). At the time, Seattle was the third-biggest metropolitan area on the West Coast. The Cleveland Indians briefly considered a move to Seattle in 1964 but opted to stay in Ohio.  In 1967 Charles Finley looked to move his Kansas City Athletics to Seattle, but ended up moving the Athletics to Oakland, California.  There was no real competition from other professional teams. While Seattle had landed the National Basketball Association (NBA)'s SuperSonics in 1967, the NBA was not in the same class as baseball was in terms of popularity at the time. Bill Mullins, Becoming Big League, p. 51

==Formation==

The front man for the franchise ownership, Pacific Northwest Sports, Inc. (PNSI), was Dewey Soriano, a former Rainiers pitcher and general manager and former president of the PCL.Seattle Times, 10 April 1969 In an ominous sign of things to come, Soriano had to ask William R. Daley, who had owned the Indians at the time they flirted with Seattle, to underwrite much of the purchase price. In return, Soriano sold Daley 47 percent of the stock—the largest stake in the club. He became chairman of the board while Soriano served as president.
However, a couple of factors were beyond the Pilots' control. They were originally not set to start play until [tpl]by|1971[/tpl] along with the Kansas City Royals.  However, the date was moved up to [tpl]by|1969[/tpl] under pressure from Senator Stuart Symington of Missouri. Professional baseball had been played in Kansas City in one form or another from [tpl]by|1883[/tpl] until the A's left for Oakland after the [tpl]by|1967[/tpl] season, and Symington would not accept the prospect of Kansas City having to wait three years for baseball to return.Seattle Times, 19 October 1967 (The American League would not allow only one new team to enter the league, as the resulting odd number of teams would unbalance the schedule. That meant Kansas City and Seattle had to be admitted together.)
Also, the Pilots had to pay the PCL $1 million to compensate for the loss of one of its most successful franchises. After King County voters approved a bond for a domed stadium (what would become the Kingdome) in 1968, the Seattle Pilots were officially born.Susananne Elaine Vandenbosch, "The 1968 Forward Thrust Election," pp. 85, 92 California Angels executive Marvin Milkes was hired as general manager, and Joe Schultz, coach of the National League Champion St. Louis Cardinals, became manager.Seattle Times, 21 February 1968

==Team Issues==

Schultz and Milkes both optimistically stated that they thought Pilots could finish third in the newly formed, six-team AL West.Bill Mullins, Becoming Big League, pp. 117-118  However, to the surprise of almost no one outside Seattle, the Pilots experienced the typical struggles of a first-year expansion team.  They won their very first game, and then their home opener three days later, but only won five more times in the first month.  Nevertheless, the Pilots managed to stay in reasonable striking distance of .500.  The Pilots were only 6 games back of the division lead as late as June 28. But a disastrous 9–20 July (and an even worse 6-22 August) ended even a faint hope of any kind of contention, though they were still in third place as late as August.  The team finished the season in last place in the AL West with a record of 64-98, 33 games out of first.1969 Seattle Pilots season
However, the team's poor play was the least of its troubles. The most obvious problem was Sicks' Stadium. The longtime home of the Rainiers, it had once been considered one of the best ballparks in minor league baseball.Alan J. Stein, "Sicks' Stadium," HistoryLink.org. By the 1960s, however, it was considered far behind the times. While a condition of MLB awarding the Pilots to Seattle was that Sicks' had to be expanded to 30,000 seats, only 19,500 seats were ready by Opening Day because of numerous delays.Bill Mullins, Becoming Big League, p. 141 The scoreboard was not even ready until the night before the season opener. By June there were finally 25,000 seats in place.  Water pressure was almost nonexistent after the seventh inning, especially with crowds above 8,000.Bill Mullins, Becoming Big League, p. 145 Attendance was poor (678,000) and the Pilots lost several hundred thousand dollars their first and only season.Bill Mullins, Becoming Big League, p. 231 The team's new stadium was slated to be built at the Seattle Center, but a petition by stadium opponents ground the project to a halt.The Sporting News, 14 December 1968

==Relocation==

By the end of the season, the Pilots were gasping.  However, Daley refused to put up more financing.  It was obvious that they would not survive long enough to move into their new park without new ownership.Bill Mullins, Becoming Big League, p. 237  It was also obvious that such a move would have to happen quickly, as Sicks' Stadium was inadequate even for temporary use.
During the offseason, Soriano made contact with car salesman and former Milwaukee Braves minority owner Bud Selig, who was leading the effort to bring major league baseball back to Milwaukee. They met in secret for over a month after the end of the season, and during Game 1 of the World Series, Soriano agreed to sell the Pilots to Selig for $10.8 million.Bill Mullins, Becoming Big League, p. 194 Selig would then move the team to Milwaukee. 
However, the remaining owners of the Pilots turned it down in the face of pressure from Washington State's two senators, Warren Magnuson and Henry M. "Scoop" Jackson, as well as state attorney general Slade Gorton. Local theater chain owner Fred Danz came forward in October 1969 with a $10 million deal, but it fizzled when the Bank of California called in a $4 million loan it had made to Soriano and Daley to finance the purchase of the franchise.Seattle Post-Intelligencer, 4 January 1970 In January 1970, Westin Hotels head Eddie Carlson put together a nonprofit group to buy the team.Seattle Times, 27 January 1970. However, the owners rejected the idea almost out of hand since it would have devalued the other clubs' worth. A slightly modified deal came one vote short of approval.Bill Mullins, Becoming Big League, p. 211

==Bankruptcy==

After a winter and spring full of court action, the Pilots reported for spring training under new manager Dave Bristol, unsure of where they would play. The owners had given tentative approval to the Milwaukee group, but the state of Washington got an injunction on March 16 to stop the deal. PNSI immediately filed for bankruptcy — a move intended to forestall post-sale legal action.Bill Mullins, Becoming Big League, pp. 229-230 At the bankruptcy hearing a week later, Milkes testified there was not enough money to pay the coaches, players, and office staff. Had Milkes been more than 10 days late in paying the players, they would have all become free agents and left Seattle without a team for the [tpl]by|1970[/tpl] season.Seattle Times, 24 March 1970 With this in mind, Federal Bankruptcy Referee Sidney Volinn declared the Pilots bankrupt on April 1—six days before Opening Day—clearing the way for them to move to Milwaukee. The team's equipment had been sitting in Provo, Utah with the drivers awaiting word on whether to drive toward Seattle or Milwaukee.Seattle Post-Intelligencer, 3 April 1970  The move came so late that Selig had to scrap his initial plans to change the team's colors to navy and red in honor of the minor-league Brewers of his youth.  Instead, the Brewers were stuck using old Pilots' uniforms, with the team name replaced.  One legacy of the Brewers' roots in Seattle is that to this day, their colors are still blue and gold, although the shades have been darker since 2000. 
Jim Bouton was a Pilots' relief pitcher in 1969.  His classic baseball book, Ball Four is based on a journal that he kept during the season.

==The only season in Seattle==

==See also==

==References==

==Further reading==


