[[Chief Executive of Hong Kong]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of political office-holders in Hong Kong, Politics of Hong Kong, Chief Executives of Hong Kong, Lists of political office-holders in China, Regional leaders in the People's Republic of China

The Chief Executive of Hong Kong ([tpl]zh|t=香港行政長官[/tpl]) is the head and representative of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and head of the Government of Hong Kong.Article 43, Hong Kong Basic Law: "The Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region shall be the head of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and shall represent the Region"  The position was created to replace the Governor of Hong Kong, the viceroy of the Monarch of the United Kingdom during British rule.Info.gov.hk. "Info.gov.hk." Bill 1999. Retrieved on 28 March 2010. The office, stipulated by the Hong Kong Basic Law, formally came into being on 1 July 1997 when the sovereignty of Hong Kong was transferred from the United Kingdom to the People's Republic of China.
The functions of the Chief Executive include nominating Principal Officials of the Government for appointment by the Government of the People’s Republic of China, conducting external affairs, appointing judges and other public officers, giving consent to legislation passed by the Legislative Council, and bestowing honours. The Basic Law grants the Chief Executive a wide range of powers, but obliges he or she, before making important policy decisions, introducing bills to the Legislative Council, making subsidiary legislation, and dissolving the Legislative Council, to act only after consultation with the Executive Council,Article 56, Hong Kong Basic Law. which consists, among other Official and Non-official Members, the Chief Secretary of Hong Kong, the most senior Principal Official and head of the Government Secretariat, in charge of overseeing the administration of the Government.
The Chief Executive holds the title "The Honourable", and ranks first in the Hong Kong order of precedence.Protocol.gov.hk. "Protocol.gov.hk." Precedence list. Retrieved on 28 March 2010.  The current Chief Executive is Leung Chun-ying who took office on 1 July 2012. The official residence of the Chief Executive is Government House in Central, Hong Kong Island.

==Eligibility for office==

According to Article 44 of the Basic Law, the Chief Executive must be a Chinese citizen as defined by the HKSAR passport ordinance.Basiclaw.org.hk. "Basiclaw.org.hk." HK Basic law pdf. Retrieved on 28 March 2010.EAC.gov.hk. "EAC.gov.hk." Nomination of Candidates. Retrieved on 28 March 2010.  The individual must be at least 40 years old, who is a permanent resident of the HKSAR with no right of abode in any foreign country, and has ordinarily resided in Hong Kong for a continuous period of no less than 20 years.Basiclaw.gov.hk. "Basiclaw.gov.hk." HK Basic law. Retrieved on 28 March 2010.  Article 47 further requires that the Chief Executive be a person of integrity, dedicated to his or her duties.  In addition, according to electoral laws, since the 4th term of Chief Executive election, anyone interested in running for Chief Executive must receive at least 150 nominations from the Election Committee prior to the election.

==Election==

The Chief Executive is elected by a 1200-member Election Committee, an electoral college consisting of individuals (i.e. private citizens) and bodies (i.e. special interest groups) selected or elected within 28 functional constituencies, as prescribed in Annex I to the Basic Law. As a result of enabling legislation stemming from a public consultation in 2010,Press release (29 June 2010). Constitution - "Consent signed for draft Basic Law amendments", Hong Kong Government
and its approval by the National People's Congress Standing Committee in Beijing, the number of representatives was increased from 800 to 1200.Lee, Diana (30 August 2010) "Electoral changes nearer as NPC gives green light"
The functional constituencies correspond to various sectors of the economy and society, each of which hold an internal election for a set number of electors. In the first election of the Chief Executive, the Committee consisted of only 400 members Election Committee. Since the second term, the Election Committee was enlarged to its current size.Chan, Ming K. 1997 (1997). The Challenge of Hong Kong's Reintegration With China. Hong Kong University Press. Hong Kong (China). ISBN 962-209-441-4.Hong Kong USconsulate.gov. "Hong Kong USconsulate.gov." United States Hong Kong Policy Act Report. Retrieved on 28 March 2010. The elected Chief Executive must then be appointed by the Central People's Government.
According to Article 46 the term of office of the Chief Executive is five years who may not serve more than two consecutive terms. If a vacancy appears mid-term, the new Chief Executive finishes up the previous Chief Executive's term, and each person can serve for not more than two consecutive terms. The method of selecting the Chief Executive is provided under Article 45 and Annex I of the Basic Law, and the Chief Executive Election Ordinance of Hong Kong.

==Term of office==

===Duties and powers===

Under the Basic Law the Chief Executive is the chief representative of people of Hong Kong and is the head of the government of Hong Kong, whose powers and functions include leading the government, implementing the law, signing bills and budgets passed by the Legislative Council, deciding on government policies, advising appointment and dismissal principal officials of the Government of Hong Kong to the Central People's Government, appointing judges and holders of certain public offices and to pardon or commute sentences.  The position is also responsible for the policy address made to the public.
According to Article 48 of the Basic Law, the Chief Executive shall exercise the following powers and functions:
The Executive Council of Hong Kong is an organ for assisting the Chief Executive in policy-making.CEO.gov.hk. "CEO.gov.hk." Executive Council. Retrieved on 28 March 2010.  The council is consulted before making important policy decisions, introducing bills to the Legislative Council, making subordinate legislation or dissolving the Legislative Council.

===Resignation===

Article 52 stipulates circumstances under which the Chief Executive must resign.  Examples include the loss of ability to discharge his or her duties or refusal to sign a bill passed by a two-thirds majority of the Legislative Council.

===Acting and succession===

The acting and succession line is spelled out in Article 53. If the Chief Executive is not able to discharge his or her duties for short periods (such as during overseas visits), the duties would be assumed by the Chief Secretary for Administration, the Financial Secretary or the Secretary for Justice, by rotation, in that order, as acting chief executive.  In case the position becomes vacant, a new Chief Executive would have to be elected. The provisions of inability to exercise the powers come into force, and then a new election is held on the Sunday on or immediately following the 120th day after the vacancy accordingly.Info.gov.hk. "Info.gov.hk." Acting Chief Executive's opening statement. Retrieved on 28 March 2010.  No election is required, of course, if only one candidate is nominated.

===Residence and office===

Prior to the handover in 1997, the office of the Chief Executive-designate was at the 7th floor of the Asia Pacific Finance Tower.Legco.gov.hk. "Legco.gov.hk." HEAD 21 – CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S OFFICE. Retrieved on 28 March 2010.  When Tung Chee Hwa assumed duty on 1 July 1997, the office of the Chief Executive was located at the 5th floor of the Central Government Offices (Main Wing).Harbourdistrict.com.hk. "Harbourdistrict.com.hk." Sample letter with address. Retrieved on 28 March 2010.  In the past the governor had his office at the Government House.  Tung did not use the Government House as the primary residence because he lived at his own residence at Grenville House.NYtimes.com. "NYtimes.com." Tung Chee-hwa: Shipping Tycoon Chosen to Govern Hong Kong. Retrieved on 28 March 2010.  Donald Tsang decided to return to the renovated Government House during his first term, and moved in on 12 January 2006, for both his office and residence.Info.gov.hk. "Info.gov.hk." CE moves into Government House today. Retrieved on 28 March 2010. In 2011, the office of the Chief Executive moved to the low block of the new Central Government Complex in Tamar. The Government House continues serve as the official residence of the Chief Executive.

==Former CE==

Upon retirement, former Chief Executives have access to office space a 28 Kennedy Road at the former Queen's College building (built in 1900s).https://secure.flickr.com/photos/61422138@N04/7042580161/ The Office provides administrative support to Former Chief Executives to perform promotional, protocol-related, or any other activities in relation to their former official role. The activities include receiving visiting dignitaries and delegations, giving local and overseas media interviews, and taking part in speaking engagements.http://www.admwing.gov.hk/eng/links/fceo.htm
Former Chief Executives would be provided with office accommodation and administrative support as well as a car with driver service to discharge promotional and protocol-related functions. Depending on the Police's assessment, personal security protection would be provided. Former Chief Executives would also enjoy protocol arrangements and medical and dental care.http://www.cmab.gov.hk/en/press/press_351.htm
The former Chief Executive holds the title "The Honourable", and ranks third in the Hong Kong order of precedence.

==Criticism of the office==

Since the Chief Executive is elected by a committee of 1,200 select people that does not reflect the general electorate rather than the general population,State.gov. "State.gov." Background note: Hong Kong. Retrieved on 28 March 2010.  many people, in particular the pro-democrats, have criticised the office as undemocratic, and have criticised the entire election process as a "small-circle election."Taiwanauj.nat.gov.tw. "Taiwanauj.nat.gov.tw." HK-mainland China 1 democracy in the new HK: Is it reality or. Retrieved on 28 March 2010.
Moreover, there is criticism to the criteria of the candidate for the office must receive at least 150 nominations from the Election Committee.  Since the overwhelming majority of the Election Committee has ties to China, be it political or economic, this criteria is seen to be a tool to sift out any potential candidates who is not in favour with the Chinese Government.  Many events, including 2010 events such as the Five Constituencies Referendum have attempted to push for greater democracy and universal suffrage.The Standard HK. "The Standard.com." DAB is ready to rumble in suffrage polls . Retrieved on 28 March 2010.

==List of Chief Executives of Hong Kong==

==See also==

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==


