[[Old King Cole]]

CATEGORIES: British traditional history, Fictional kings, Northern Brythonic monarchs, Nursery rhymes, English folklore, 4th-century monarchs in Europe, 3rd-century monarchs in Europe, English songs, 1708 works, 1708 in England

"Old King Cole" is a British nursery rhyme most likely deriving from ancient Welsh. The historical identity of King Cole has been much debated and several candidates have been advanced as possibilities.[tpl]citation needed|date=June 2013[/tpl] It has a Roud Folk Song Index number of 1164.  The poem describes a merry king who called for his pipe, his bowl, and his three fiddlers.

==Lyrics==

The song was first recorded by William King in his Useful Transactions in Philosophy in 1708–9.I. Opie and P. Opie, The Oxford Dictionary of Nursery Rhymes (Oxford University Press, 1951, 2nd edn., 1997), pp. 134–5.
The most common modern version of the rhyme is:
 
 Old King Cole was a merry old soul
And a merry old soul was he;
He called for his pipe, and he called for his bowl
And he called for his fiddlers three.
Every fiddler he had a fiddle,
And a very fine fiddle had he;
Oh there's none so rare, as can compare
With King Cole and his fiddlers three.
William King's version has the following lyrics:
 
 Good King Cole,
And he call'd for his Bowle,
And he call'd for Fidler's three;
And there was Fiddle, Fiddle,
And twice Fiddle, Fiddle,
For 'twas my Lady's Birth-day,
Therefore we keep Holy-day
And come to be merry.

==Origins==

Cole (or more properly Coel, pronounced like "co-ell" or the English word "coil", and not "coal" as in the rhyme) is a Brythonic name. It may have been borne by a number of noted figures in the history and legends of Roman and sub-Roman Britain, most notably by Coel Hen, or Coel the Old. There are several candidates for a historical basis to the rhyme amongst the historical and mythical Coels.

===King Cole of Northern Britain===

Coel Hen, whose epithet can be translated as "the Old" or "the Ancestor", is noted in Welsh legend as a leader in the Hen Ogledd or "Old North", the Brythonic-speaking parts of southern Scotland and northern England during or after the period of the Roman withdrawal. The historian John Morris in The Age of Arthur suggested that "The early tradition is that Coel ruled the whole of the north, south of the Hadrian's Wall, the territory that the Notitia assigned to the dux military leader; but that in later generations it split into a number of independent kingdoms. It suggests that ... he was the last Roman commander, who turned his command into a kingdom."Morris, p 54 He is credited with founding a number of kingly lines in the North and was regarded as an ancestor figure, suggesting that the territory he controlled must have been substantial.[tpl]why|date=December 2012[/tpl]

===Medieval Legend===

Later writers such as Henry of Huntington and Geoffrey of Monmouth associate him with Colchester (from where he launched a rebellion which would overthrow the Roman governor Julius Asclepiodotus) and make him the father of Saint Helena of Constantinople, the mother of Constantine the Great.Henry of Huntingdon, Historia Anglorum Book I, ch. 37.Geoffrey of Monmouth, Historia Regum Britanniae, Book 5, ch. 6. Geoffrey's Historia Regum Britanniae'' expands on the legend of Coel, including material about his rule as king of the Britons and his dealings with the Romans.

===Thomas Cole-brook===

In the 19th century William Chappell, an expert on popular music, suggested the possibility that the "Old King Cole" of nursery rhyme fame was really "Old Cole", alias Thomas Cole-brook, a supposed 12th-century Reading cloth merchant whose story was recounted by Thomas Deloney in his The Pleasant History of Thomas of Reading (c. 1598), and who was well known as a character in plays of the early 17th century.

==Interpretations==

"Pipe" may refer to a musical instrument (perhaps a flute or recorder), supported by the final lyrics of the song "there's none so rare, As can compare With King Cole and his fiddlers three", which seem to suggest that King Cole and his fiddlers played music together as a group. The term "pipe" is commonly used as an "informal term for a flute or recorder". The word ceol actually means music in Gaelic, and this may be the origin of the name in the rhyme.N. Macleod and  D.  Dewar, A Dictionary of the Gaelic Language, in Two Parts (W. R. M'Phun, 1853), p. 135.

==Modern usage==

King Cole is often referenced in popular culture.
In popular usage
In literature
 With pipe on bowl. Terce for a fiddler, sixt for makmerriers, none for a Cole. 
Joyce is at the same time punning on the canonical hours Tierce, Sext, Nones (Terce ... sixt ... none) and on Fionn MacCool (fiddlers ... makmerriers ... Cole).
In popular music
 Great King Rat was a dirty old man
 And a dirty old man was he
Now what did I tell you
Would you like to see?
In magazines
 Old King Cole was a merry old soul
 Old King Cole, Cole, Cole, Cole, Cole, Cole, Cole.
In humour
 Old King Cole was a merry old soul      And a merry old soul was he; He called for his pipe, and he called for his bowl -      I guess we all know about Old King Cole... 
Carlin's intonation of the final line suggested that the pipe and bowl should be interpreted as marijuana references.
In military cadence
 Old King Cole was a merry old soul
 and a merry ol' soul was he, uh huh.
He called for his pipe, and he called for his bowl
and he called for his privates three, uh huh.
Beer!  Beer!  Beer! cried the private.
Brave men are we
There's none so fair as they can compare
to the airborne infantry, uh huh.
The cadence included a verse for ranks from private to general, in the form of a cumulative song; each verse included a satire at the expense of each rank: "Beer beer beer" said the privates, "Where's my three-day pass" said the corporals, "Drill drill drill" said the sergeant, "Who's gonna read my map" said the looie, "Who's gonna shine my boots" said the captain, "Who's gonna drive my jeep" said the major, "Who's gonna mow my lawn" said the colonel, "Who's gonna walk my dog" said the general.
A version can be heard on the 1960 album Belafonte Returns to Carnegie Hall by Harry Belafonte. It can also be found in a 1929 music book "Sound Off!" Soldier songs from Yankee Doodle to Parley Voo" http://www.worldcat.org/title/sound-off-soldier-songs-from-yankee-doodle-to-parley-voo/oclc/1485873 by Edward Arthur Dolph.
In comics and graphic novels
In video games
In T.V. shows
 Dance with the fiddlers
 Dance with the fiddlers
Dance with the fiddlers three.
The nursery rhyme has also been used in Sesame Street, using the fiddlers as a way to show math, with Ernie taking the role of Old King Cole.
In film
In political cartoons
In Yiddish

==Notes==

==References==


