[[Wedding breakfast]]

CATEGORIES: Wedding traditions, Breakfasts

A wedding breakfast is a dinner given to the bride, bridegroom, and guests at the wedding reception that follows a wedding in the United Kingdom, Germany, Austria, Scandinavia and some English-speaking countries. The Compact Oxford DictionaryCompact Oxford Dictionary lists the phrase as only “British”, and the Merriam-Webster online dictionaryMerriam-Webster online dictionary does not list it at all.
Wedding breakfast custom is occasionally spotted in touristic countries - especially ones that are destination for tourists from English speaking countries. Countries like Polandhttp://forgetmenots-weddings.blogspot.dk/2011/02/twoj-slub-jak-sniadanie-u-tiffniego.html have prepared offers to cater especially for wedding tourists.
Nowadays the wedding breakfast is not normally a morning meal, so its name can be confusing. The name is claimedWagner, L. (1894). Manners, customs and observances.  London: Heinemann.  (Chapter 7) to have arisen from the fact that in pre-Reformation times the wedding service was usually a Eucharistic Mass and that the bride and bridegroom would therefore have been fasting before the wedding in order to be eligible to receive the sacrament of Holy Communion. After the wedding ceremony was complete, the priest would bless and distribute some wine, cakes, and sweetmeats, which were then handed round to the company, including the bride and groom.  This distribution of food and drink was therefore a literal “break fast” for the bride and groom, though others in attendance would not necessarily take Communion and therefore would not necessarily have been fasting. Since usage of the phrase cannot be shown to date back earlier than the first half of the nineteenth century however, a pre-16th-century origin seems unlikely.
The author of Party-giving on Every Scale (London, n.d. 1880) suggests the phrase may have evolved fifty years earlier:
 The orthodox "Wedding Breakfast" might more properly be termed a "Wedding Luncheon," as it assumes the character of that meal to a great extent; in any case it bears little relation to the breakfast of that day, although the title of breakfast is still applied to it, out of compliment to tradition. As recently as fifty years ago luncheon was not a recognized meal, even in the wealthiest families, and the marriage feast was modernized into the wedding breakfast, which appellation this entertainment still bears. 
The Oxford English Dictionary does not record any occurrences of the phrase "wedding breakfast" before 1850, but it was used at least as far back as 1838.In a newspaper review of a recently published book, The Veteran by John Harley, the reviewer quotes: 'C--- and his bride returned to the coffee house, where they were received with great kindness the master and mistress who, notwithstanding the short notice, had a comfortable wedding-breakfast prepared for them'.[tpl]cite journal|title=The Times|date=15 January 1838|page=7[/tpl] This would agree with the quotation above, which suggests the phrase came into use about the 1830s.

==See also==

==References==


