[[Biolipid]]

CATEGORIES: Lipids

A biolipid is a lipid from a biological source. The biological sources are:
BIO-lipid is an intracellular liposome delivery system composed of the same four essential phospholipids that surround every cell in our body. They are natural components of dairy cream and are partly responsible for the bond between fat and water in milk products. The special lipids used in the coating of Symbiotics Colostrum are unique water-soluble fats that significantly increase the solubility and absorption of any substance coated with them.

==How does it work?==

Agglomeration is the process that Symbiotics uses to spraying powders with a lipid to make them more readily dispersible in water. Symbiotics Colostrum Plus has been sprayed with a natural substance contained in dairy cream called BIO-lipid™. This exclusive coating is mammalian in nature, so it is an exact match to the cellular membrane lipid that surrounds each cell in our body. Unlike plant-sourced lipids, BIO-lipid™ is readily absorbed into the cell without rejection or allergic reaction. It is an effective intracellular delivery system enhancing the absorption of all substances.

==Names and functions of some biolipids==

Has been shown to help in many cellular pathways, including cellular growth and detection of unhealthy cells. It may also help contribute to the suppression of harmful cells. SPM serves as a surface receptor for immunoglobulins and some bacteria and is an activator of Epithelial Growth Receptors.
One of the specific phospholipids found in the cellular membranes of many living things. It comprises the backbone of cell membranes and contributes to the fluidity and structural environment of the cell. PE plays an important role in myelin structure of nerve endings in the brain.
Is the most abundant component of all cell membranes and has been shown to aid many of the body’s important functions. Studies also prove that PC has a positive effect on memory and helps maintain cholesterol level. PC aids the liver with nutrient assimilation, hormone balancing, and toxin elimination. It helps the liver to effectively eliminate viruses, pollutants, and pharmaceuticals from the body’s cells. PC has also been shown to help slow the aging process by protecting the cell membranes from damage.
Is found on the surface of membranes in brain cells. It stimulates the production of a brain messenger chemical that helps regulate memory by increasing the availability of glucose in the brain. (Glucose is the main fuel for metabolic reactions in the brain.) PS has been shown to stimulate production of dopamine and protein kinase C and protects against stress-induced behavioral changes. Current studies are investigating the effects on depression and other age-associated memory impairments.

==References==


