[[Bedford Hills Correctional Facility for Women]]

CATEGORIES: Prisons in New York, Women's prisons in the United States, Capital punishment in New York, Buildings and structures in Westchester County, New York

Address: 247 Harris Rd
Bedford Hills, NY 10507
Bedford Hills Correctional Facility for Women is a prison for women in Bedford Hills in the Town of Bedford, Westchester County, New York, USA."Bedford town, Westchester County, New York." U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved on September 2, 2010. Bedford Hills, the only New York State Department of Correctional Services women's maximum security prison,Silver, Kate. "How Mya Saved Jacob." Spirit Magazine. Retrieved on January 15, 2011. is the largest women's prison in New York state and has hosted many infamous prisoners. The prison previously opened under the name Westfield State Farm in 1901.
Bedford Hills is one of several New York facilities exclusively for women, the others being Albion Correctional Facility, Bayview Correctional Facility, Beacon Correctional Facility, and Taconic Correctional Facility.New York State Department of Corrections Facility Listing. Retrieved on July 8, 2011.  Its family-centered program, founded by Sister Elaine Roulet, has served as a model for other prison programs in the United States and is considered the standard for innovative family-centered programs.Encyclopedia of American Prisons, by Marilyn D. McShane, Franklin P. Williams

==Mothers of Bedford==

Filmmaker Jenifer McShane produced a documentary film about the mothers in the family center of Bedford Hills.  She spent four years doing research at Bedford Hills and following the experiences of the women and their families. The film examines the experiences of five women as they deal with being prisoners and mothers.  Eighty percent of women in US prisons today are mothers of school-age children. The Fledgling Fund says of the film, “Mothers of Bedford is a beautiful film. It provides audiences with unprecedented access to this community of women and will move our national conversation about incarceration to a new level.”"Mothers of Bedford" Documentary To Be Screened Next Week, The Scarsdale PatchMothers of Bedford Documentary

==Notable inmates==

==References==

==External links==


