[[Joy Fielding]]

CATEGORIES: 1945 births, Living people, 20th-century Canadian novelists, 21st-century Canadian novelists, Canadian screenwriters, University of Toronto alumni, Canadian women novelists, Canadian film actresses, Actresses from Toronto, Writers from Toronto

Joy Fielding (née Tepperman; born March 18, 1945) is a Canadian novelist and actress. She lives in Toronto, Ontario.

==Biography==

Born in Toronto, Ontario, she graduated from the University of Toronto in 1966, with a Bachelor of Arts in English Literature. As Joy Tepperman, she had a brief acting career, appearing in the film Winter Kept Us Warm (1965) and in an episode of Gunsmoke. She later changed her last name to Fielding (after Henry Fielding) and began writing novels.
Fielding is also the screenwriter of the television film Golden Will: The Silken Laumann Story.
In the 1980s, she was also a regular contributor of book reviews to Jack Farr's CBC Radio program The Radio Show.

==Personal==

At the age of 8, Tepperman wrote her first story and sent it into a local magazine, and at age 12 sent in her first TV script, however both were rejected. She had a brief acting career, eventually giving it up to write full-time in 1972.Wagner, Vit. "Okay With Being 'Popular'; Author Not In The Same League as Joan Didion, But She's Writing the Books She Wants to Write." Toronto Star 28 Mar 2008: E.9. Print.  She has published to date 22 novels, two of which were converted into film. Fielding's process of having an idea to the point the novel is finished generally takes a year, the writing itself taking four to eight months.http://www.joyfielding.com
Fielding sets most of her novels in American cities such as Boston and Chicago. She has said that she prefers to set her novels in "big American cities, the landscape seems best for her themes of urban alienation and loss of identity."
Fielding is a Canadian citizen. Her husband's name is Warren,Wherry, Aaron. "Author has the world at her doorstep: Joy Fielding: Novelist." National Post 06 Sep 2003, Toronto ed: TO.2. Print. and they have two daughters, Annie and Shannon.Wong, Jan. "Home is where the sales aren't for this Canadian novelist." The Globe and Mail 12 Mr. 1998, Canadian Newsstand Major Dailies, ProQuest. Web. 26 Oct. 2010  They have property in Toronto, Ontario, as well as Palm Beach, Florida.

==Interview==

Fielding had an interview with the Vancouver Sun in 2007, just after her publication of Heartstopper. She enjoys catching readers off guard with the endings of her stories, but insists that "it isn't what her fiction is about",Wigod, Rebecca. "Plot-Meister Says That For Her, It's Mostly About Character." The Vancouver Sun 28 Apr 2007, final ed: C.9. Print. but rather more about the development of her characters.
Discussing her novels with the Toronto Star in 2008, she said "I might not write fiction in the literary sense.  But I write very well.  My characters are good. My dialog is good. And my stories are really involving. I'm writing exactly the kind of books I like to write.  And they're the kind of books I like to read. They're popular commercial fiction. That's what they are."

==Audience==

Fielding has been noted as a novelist who is more popular in the United States and foreign countries, rather than in her native Canada. For example, the novel Kiss Mommy Goodbye was more popular in the States, and See Jane Run in Germany. In addition, she had an American agent and publisher, although she has now switched to a Canadian publisher.

==Bibliography==

==References==

==External links==


