[[John Selden Roane]]

CATEGORIES: Governors of Arkansas, Members of the Arkansas House of Representatives, Confederate States Army generals, People of Arkansas in the American Civil War, United States Army officers, 1817 births, 1867 deaths, Democratic Party state governors of the United States, People from Wilson County, Tennessee

John Selden Roane (January 8, 1817[tpl]spaced ndash[/tpl]April 8, 1867) was a Confederate Brigadier General during the American Civil War. He also served as the fourth Governor of the State of Arkansas.

==Biography==

John Selden Roane was born in Lebanon in Wilson County, Tennessee, and was educated at Cumberland College which at the time was located in Princeton, Kentucky. Roane immigrated to Arkansas in 1837, studied law, and was admitted to the bar. From 1840 to 1842 he was Prosecuting Attorney for the Second Judicial District of Arkansas. He served in the Arkansas House of Representatives from 1842 to 1844.
At the outbreak of the Mexican-American War, Roane was made a lieutenant colonel in Archibald Yell's Arkansas infantry regiment and succeeded to command of the regiment when Colonel Yell was mortally wounded repelling the charge of the Mexican lancers at the Battle of Buena Vista. Roane was officially appointed Colonel of the regiment on February 28, 1847. Roane was known to be jealous of the honor of his state and once challenged Albert Pike to a duel over what he perceived as derogatory statements made about the Arkansas regiment in the Mexican-American War. The duel was fought, but neither combatant was injured.
Roane served as Governor of Arkansas from 1849 to 1852 and advocated internal improvements and increased funding for education.
On February 1, 1855, John Selden Roane married Mary Kimbrough Smith (July 27, 1833-September 13, 1907), daughter of Nathaniel G. Smith & Sarah Kimbrough Martin in Tulip, Dallas County, Arkansas.  Judge Somerville presided.
At the outbreak of the Civil War, Roane joined the Confederate Army and on March 20, 1862, and received an appointment as Brigadier General. After most troops were moved from Arkansas across the Mississippi River, Roane was placed in charge of the defense of Arkansas. At this time the state was nearly defenseless, and Roane, with the newly appointed commander of the Trans-Mississippi District General Thomas C. Hindman, cobbled together a reasonable defensive force. General Roane and his brigade took part in numerous battles in the Trans-Mississippi District, including the Battle of Prairie Grove in northwest Arkansas.
He died in Pine Bluff, Arkansas, and is buried at Oaklawn Cemetery in Little Rock.

==See also==

==References==


