[[Andrew Yao]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, American computer scientists, Chinese emigrants to the United States, Chinese University of Hong Kong people, Educators from Shanghai, Fellows of the Association for Computing Machinery, Harvard University alumni, Knuth Prize laureates, Living people, Members of Academia Sinica, Members of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences, National Taiwan University alumni, Princeton University faculty, Scientists from Shanghai, Stanford University Department of Computer Science faculty, Tsinghua University faculty, Turing Award laureates, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign alumni, Writers from Shanghai, Guggenheim Fellows

Andrew Chi-Chih Yao ([tpl]zh|c=姚期智|p=Yáo Qīzhì[/tpl]) is a Taiwanese American computer scientist and computational theorist. Yao used the minimax theorem to prove what is now known as Yao's Principle.
Yao was born in Shanghai, China.  He completed his undergraduate education in physics at the National Taiwan University, before completing a Doctor of Philosophy in physics at Harvard University in 1972, and then a second PhD in computer science from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 1975.
In 1996 he was awarded the Knuth Prize. He received the Turing Award, the most prestigious award in computer science, in 2000, "in recognition of his fundamental contributions to the theory of computation, including the complexity-based theory of pseudorandom number generation, cryptography, and communication complexity".
From 1982 to 1986, he was a full professor at Stanford University. From 1986 to 2004, he was the William and Edna Macaleer Professor of Engineering and Applied Science at Princeton University, where he continued to work on algorithms and complexity. In 2004, he became a Professor of the Center for Advanced Study, Tsinghua University (CASTU) and the director of the Institute for Theoretical Computer Science (ITCS), Tsinghua University in Beijing. He now is the Distinguished Professor-at-Large in the Chinese University of Hong Kong.
He is a member of U.S. National Academy of Sciences, a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, a fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery, and a foreign member of Chinese Academy of Sciences. His wife, Frances Yao, is also a well-known theoretical computer scientist.

==See also==

==External links==


