[[Legal aspects of transsexualism]]

CATEGORIES: Transgender law, Transgender

A person may be considered to be a transsexual person if their gender identity is incongruent with the sex they were assigned at birth, and consequently also with the gender role and social status that is typically associated with that sex. They may have, or may intend to establish, a new gender status that accords with their gender identity. Most legal jurisdictions recognise the two traditional gender identities and social roles, man and woman, but tend to exclude any other gender identities, and expressions. There is now a greater understanding of the breadth of variation outside the typical categories of 'man, and 'woman', and many self-descriptions are now entering the literature, including pan-gender, polygender, gender queer and non gender. Medically and socially the term 'transsexualism' is being replaced with 'gender dysphoria, and terms such as 'transgender people' and 'trans men and trans women' are replacing the narrow category of transsexual people.
This raises many legal issues and aspects of transsexualism.  Most of these issues are generally considered a part of family law, especially the issues of marriage and the question of a transsexual person benefiting from a partner's insurance or social security.
The degree of legal recognition provided to transsexualism varies widely throughout the world.  Many countries now legally recognise sex reassignments by permitting a change of legal gender on an individual's birth certificate.  Many transsexual people have permanent surgery to change their body or semi-permanently change their body by hormonal means (known as sex reassignment therapy). In many countries, some of these modifications are required for legal recognition. In a few, the legal aspects are directly tied to health care; i.e. the same bodies or doctors decide whether a person can move forward in their treatment, and the subsequent processes automatically incorporate both matters.
In some jurisdictions, transgender people (who are considered non-transsexual) can benefit from the legal recognition given to transsexual people. In some countries, an explicit medical diagnosis of transsexualism is (at least formally) necessary. In others, a diagnosis of gender dysphoria, or simply the fact that one has established a non-conforming gender role, can be sufficient for some or all of the legal recognition available.

==Europe==

