[[Restriction modification system]]

CATEGORIES: Bacteriophages, Molecular biology, Immune system

The restriction modification system (RM system) is used by bacteria, and perhaps other prokaryotic organisms to protect themselves from foreign DNA, such as the one borne by bacteriophages.  This phenomenon was first noticed in the 1950s.  Certain bacteria strains were found to inhibit (restrict) the growth of viruses grown in previous strains.  This effect was attributed to sequence-specific restriction enzymes.
Bacteria have restriction enzymes, also called restriction endonucleases, which cleave double stranded DNA at specific points into fragments, which are then degraded further by other endonucleases. This prevents infection by effectively destroying the foreign DNA introduced by an infectious agent (such as a bacteriophage). Approximately one quarter of known bacteria possess RM systems and of those about one half have more than one type of system.
Given that the sequences of the restriction enzymes recognize are very short, the bacterium itself will almost certainly have many of these sequences present in its own DNA. Therefore, in order to prevent destruction of its own DNA by the restriction enzymes, the bacterium marks its own DNA by adding methyl groups to it. This modification must not interfere with the DNA base-pairing, and therefore, usually only a few specific bases are modified on each strand.
Endonucleases cleave internal/non-terminal phosphodiester bonds. Restriction endonucleases cleave internal phosphodiester bonds only after recognising specific sequences in DNA which are usually 4-6 base pairs long, and often palindromic.

==Types of restriction modification system==

There are five kinds of restriction modification system: type I, type II, type IIS, type III and type IV, all with restriction enzyme activity and a methylase activity. They were named in the order of discovery, although the type II system is the most common.
Type I systems are the most complex, consisting of three polypeptides: R (restriction), M (modification), and S (specificity).  The resulting complex can both cleave and methylate DNA. Both reactions require ATP, and cleavage often occurs a considerable distance from the recognition site. The S subunit determines the specificity of both restriction and methylation.  Cleavage occurs at variable distances from the recognition sequence, so discrete bands are not easily visualized by gel electrophoresis.
Type II systems are the simplest and the most prevalent. Instead of working as a complex, the methyltransferase and endonuclease are encoded as two separate proteins and act independently (there is no specificity protein). Both proteins recognize the same recognition site, and therefore compete for activity. The methyltransferase acts as a monomer, methylating the duplex one strand at a time.  The endonuclease acts as a homodimer, which facilitates the cleavage of both strands.  Cleavage occurs at a defined position close to or within the recognition sequence, thus producing discrete fragments during gel electrophoresis.  For this reason, Type II systems are used in labs for DNA analysis and gene cloning.
Type III systems have R and M proteins that form a complex of modification and cleavage. The M protein, however, can methylate on its own. Methylation also only occurs on one strand of the DNA unlike most other known mechanisms. The heterodimer formed by the R and M proteins competes with itself by modifying and restricting the same reaction.  This results in incomplete digestion.Wilson, G., "Organization of Restriction-Modification Systems,"Nucleic Acids Research (1991), Vol 19, pg2539-2566.Wilson, G., "Restriction and Modification Systems," Annual Review of Genetics (1991), 25:585-627.

==Uses==

Some viruses have evolved ways of subverting the restriction modification system, usually by modifying their own DNA, by adding methyl or glycosyl groups to it, thus blocking the restriction enzymes. Other viruses, such as bacteriophages T3 and T7, encode proteins that inhibit the restriction enzymes.
To counteract these viruses, some bacteria have evolved restriction systems which only recognize and cleave modified DNA, but do not act upon the host's unmodified DNA. Some prokaryotes have developed multiple types of restriction modification systems.
1. Molecular Biology:
(a) Cloning: RM systems can be cloned into plasmids and selected because of the resistance provided by the methylation enzyme. Once the plasmid begins to replicate, the methylation enzyme will be produced and methylate the plasmid DNA, protecting it from a specific restriction enzyme.
(b) Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphisms: Restriction enzymes are also used to analyse the composition of DNA in regard to presence or absence of mutations that affect the specificity of the REase cleavage specificity. When wild-type and mutants are analysed by digestion with different REases, the gel-electrophoretic products vary in length, largely because mutant genes will not be cleaved in a similar pattern as wild-type for presence of mutations that render the REases nonb-specific to the mutant sequence.
2. Gene-Therapy (a model for anti-viral therapy in humans)
In 1999, Dr. Misaki Wayengera's group at the Unit of Genetics and Genomics, Makerere University College of Health Sciences https://chs.mak.ac.ug  advanced the idea, that the bacteria R-M system presented a model for devising human anti-viral gene or genomic vaccines and therapies.Wayengera M: HIV and Gene Therapy: The proposed enzymatic model for a gene therapy against HIV. Makerere Med J. 2003, 38:28-30. Indeed, it is recognized that the RM system serves an innate defense-role in bacteria by restricting tropism by bacteriophages.Wayengera M: Why bacteria derived R-M nucleic enzymatic peptides are efficient therapeutic molecules for use in the design and development of novel HIV therapeutic molecules. Afr J Biotechnol. 2008, 7 (12): 1791–1796. In the initial 7 years, this group embarked on identifying bacteria derived REases that cleave the DNA of various human viruses, including HSV-2, high-risk HPVs and HIV-1.Wayengera M, Kajumbula H, Byarugaba W: Frequency and site mapping of HIV-1/SIVcpz, HIV-2/SIVsmm and Other SIV gene sequence cleavage by various bacteria restriction enzymes: Precursors for a novel HIV inhibitory product. Afr J Biotechnol 2007, 6(10):1225-1232.Wayengera M, Kajumbula H, Byarugaba W: Identification of restriction endonuclease with potential ability to cleave the HSV-2 genome: inherent potential for biosynthetic versus live microbicides. Theor Biol Med Model. 2008, 5:18.Wayengera M: Pre-Integration gene slicing (PRINT-GSX) as an alternate or complimentary gene therapy modem to RNA interference. J Appl Biol Sci. 2008, 1(2):56-63.Wayengera M: Diverting primary HIV entry and replication to vaginal commensal lactobacillus expressing R-M nucleic enzymatic peptides with potent activity at cleaving proviral DNA as a novel HIV live microbicide strategy. Microbicide- New Delhi, India 2008. Abs-10. Due to the potential of causing genome-toxicity when delivered in-vivo, majority earlier application-modules presented were ex-vivo, including a live-microbicide model of lactobacillus that both expresses co-receptors for the virus and secrets REases that destroy the viral DNA (trojan horse), and nanoparticles.Wayengera M: xREPLAB: A recombinant lactobacillus strain producing restriction enzymes with potent activity against HIV proviral DNA as a Live Microbicide Strategy. AIDS vaccine- Washington, Seattle 2007, :P05-01.Wayengera M: A Recombinant lactobacillus strain producing restriction enzymes that cleave proviral HIV DNA may offer a novel Vagino-cervical mucosal exogenous live Microbicide strategy for preventing HIV transmission among high-risk women. Afr J Biotechnol 2007, 6(15):1750-1756.Wayengera M: PREX-1979: Modeling the first ever prototype of could be a 5th generation of Microbicides for preventing HIV infection among high-risk women. Afr J Biotechnol. 2007, 6(10):1221-1224. A preclinical trial of REsaes combined with an eukaryotic MTase was proposed but never pre-clinically trialled as a strategy to protect the host-genome in a similar way as bacteria do, by methylating their target-DNAs.Wayengera M: Preparing for a Phase 1 Preclinical trial of VRX-SMR: a Lentiviral Vector transduced with restriction enzymes cleaving HIV proviral DNA as a therapeutic vaccine: Opportunities and Challenges. Vaccine Congress -Amsterdam, Netherlands 2007, :24OR. Over the past years, this group has focused its research on artificially engineered restriction enzymes, the zinc finger nucleases, as safe and more efficient tools for inducing target mutagenesis and abberations of human-infecting viruses.Wayengera, M.Proviral HIV-genome-wide and pol-gene specific zinc finger nucleases: usability for targeted HIV gene therapy.Theor Biol Med Model, (2011), 8, pp26.Wayengera, M.Zinc finger arrays binding human papillomavirus types 16 and 18 genomic DNA: precursors of gene-therapeutics for in-situ reversal of associated cervical neoplasia.Theor Biol Med Model, (2011), 9, pp30.Wayengera, M.Identity of zinc finger nucleases with specificity to herpes simplex virus type II genomic DNA: novel HSV-2 vaccine/therapy precursors.Theor Biol Med Model, (2011), 8, pp23. As far as HIV/AIDS is concerned, negotiations are under-way to undertake a high-risk Phase-I clinical trial of HIV-1 directed ZFN for safety among healthy adult volunteers. It is important to state that this group proposes to target HIV-1 before it integrates into the genome's of CD4+ve T cells, rather than attempt to target the already established latent reservoir of resting CD4+ve T cells. The latter is difficult to target by in-vivo methods such as the one proposed by this team (iliac-bone-marrow infusions), largely because of its rarity (one in a million cells). The clinical argument is that, if a genomic vaccine of marrow infusions of HIV-1 specific ZFN, is administered to HIV-1 un-infected persons, it can lead to transduction of the progenitor cells with a continued build-up of HIV-1 resistant peripheral and tissue CD4+ve T cells. This can prevent primary HIV-1 infection on subsequent exposures. "This is exactly what bacteria with RM systems do; they attack the xenogenic phage DNA enroute but before it integrates into their genomes", Dr. Wayengera says. "Some-how, we must stick to the natural model, nature offers us the best examples" http://www.newvision.co.ug/PA/9/46/420635. Further more,   among those recently infected with HIV-1, the same approach may serve as a prophylactic-vaccine to prevent the build-up of latent HIV-1 reservoirs if administered early in the infection. A major advantage offered by direct in-vivo delivery of HIV-1 specific ZFN rather than ex-vivo manipulation, is that the same promises to be cheap, offering a one-stop treatment, however non-routine and invasive bone-marrow infusions may sound. In addition, because bone-marrow progenitors are targeted for primary transduction, there is no need for repeated treatments, since all daughter cells from those effectively transfected and transduced progenitors, are bound to be modified and thus resistant to HIV-1.

==See also==

==References==


