[[States Records]]

CATEGORIES: Defunct record labels of the United States

States Record Company was a  Chicago-based record label. A subsidiary of United Records, it was in business from May 1952 to December 1957.  States focused on rhythm and blues, jazz, and gospel.
States was operated by Leonard Allen and Lew Simpkins until Simpkins' death in April 1953; thereafter, Allen was solely responsible for the company.Pruter, Robert, Campbell, Robert L. and Kelly, Tom "The United and States Labels Part I" Accessed August 13, 2009
Most sessions for States were done at Universal Recording, with high-fidelity results.
The most important blues artist to record for States was Junior Wells, making his debut as a leader; he cut sessions for the company in 1953 and 1954.  In the down-home category, Allen also released singles by Robert Nighthawk and Big Walter Horton, as well as pianist Eddie Ware, guitarist L. C. McKinley, and drummer James Bannister.  Standup blues singers to record for the label included Edward "The Great Gates" White (accompanied on his outing by Tom Archia and Red Saunders), Cliff Butler, Arbee Stidham, Jack Cooley, and Harold Burrage.
States issued juke-box jazz sides by tenor saxophonists Paul Bascomb, Jimmy Coe, and Cozy Eggleston. A few forays into the Detroit scene produced rhythm and blues by Sax Kari, Jimmy Hamilton, T. J. Fowler, and Helen Thompson. States became involved in doo-wop in 1953 when Allen recorded The Hornets.  He soon added The Danderliers, the Five Chances, The Strollers and The Palms.
The vocal groups were rehearsed by Al Smith, who also led studio bands featuring such performers as guitarist Lefty Bates, tenor saxophonist Red Holloway, and drummer Vernel Fournier. In gospel, The Caravans were a mainstay of the label throughout its existence.  Eventually, Allen added the Genesa Smith Singers and the Lucy Smith Singers.
Allen did less recording after 1954, and closed both of his labels around the end of 1957.Pruter, Robert, Campbell, Robert L., and Kelly, Tom. "The United and States Labels Part II" Accessed August 26, 2009  States releases ran consecutively from 101 to 164, for a total of 64 singles on the label.
States relied heavily on The Caravans, releasing 14 singles on them and compiling many more unissued tracks.  After the company closed, Savoy Records, which had signed the group and was seeking to consolidate its position in gospel music, bought this rich cache of material.  States' remaining output was acquired in 1975 by Bob Koester of Delmark Records, and has been included in comprehensive reissue programs.

==Releases==

==See also==

==References==


