[[Werner Seelenbinder]]

CATEGORIES: 1904 births, 1944 deaths, People from Szczecin, People condemned by Nazi courts, People from the Province of Pomerania, German sport wrestlers, Germany's Sports Hall of Fame inductees, German Communist Party members, German people executed by decapitation, People executed by Germany by decapitation

Werner Seelenbinder (2 August 1904 – 24 October 1944) was a German communist and wrestler.

==Early years==

Seelenbinder was born in Stettin, Pomerania, and became a wrestler after training as a joiner. He had connections with the young people's workers' movement from an early age. Seelenbinder won the light heavyweight class of Greco-Roman wrestling at the 1925 Workers' Olympiad in Frankfurt. In 1928 and 1929 he won the Spartakiade in Moscow; over 200 German sportsmen were banned from the contest, but Seelenbinder, with his interest in Marxism, took part.Hans Maur. Gedenkstätten der Arbeiterbewegung in Berlin-Friedrichshain, published by the district leadership of the SED, Bezirkskommission zur Erforschung der Geschichte der örtlichen Arbeiterbewegung in Zusammenarbeit mit der Kreiskommission zur Erforschung der Geschichte der örtlichen Arbeiterbewegung bei der Kreisleitung Berlin-Friedrichshain der SED (1981) p. 64-66  His first trip to Moscow had already persuaded him to become a member of the German communist party, the KPD. In 1933 he refused to give the Hitler salute when receiving his medal at the German Wrestling Championship, and was rewarded with a sixteen-month ban on training and sports events.
German workers' sports clubs were soon banned by the Nazi party; at this point the KPD approached Seelenbinder, asking him to join one of the legal sports clubs, to train to get as much sporting success as possible, so he would be able to carry messages across Germany and into other countries. As one of the country's top sportsmen he had more freedom of movement and could travel abroad. As well as preparing for the Olympics, Seelenbinder joined the Uhrig Group, an underground resistance group named after Robert Uhrig, who organized it.

==1936 Olympics and arrest==

As a committed communist Seelenbinder was appalled by the 1936 Olympic Games that were to be held in Nazi Germany.  He had originally planned to boycott it, but friends persuaded him to compete anyway, win, and defy the Nazis by not giving the required "Heil Hitler!" salute, but to use a vulgar gesture instead.  This plan was foiled when he lost the first match. He eventually came in fourth in the event.
The Nazis had only allowed Seelenbinder to take part in the Olympics because they thought he would secure them a medal: otherwise, they did not trust him in the slightest. Seelenbinder's illegal activities as a courier and his participation in the Uhrig Group had caught their attention: he was arrested, along with 65 other members of the group, on 4 February 1942 and after being tortured for eight days, and enduring nine camps and prisons for two and half years, he was sentenced to death by the Volksgerichtshof, he was executed for treason on 24 October 1944 at Brandenburg-Görden Prison – he was beheaded with an axe.  The imprisonment left him weighing a mere 60 kilograms (132 pounds), from his previous weight of 90 kilos (198 pounds).
In his farewell letter, he wrote to his father :

==Memorials and controversy==

On 29 July 1945 an urn containing Seelenbinder's ashes was buried at the site of his old club, the Berolina 03 Sports Club stadium in Berlin. At the same time, the stadium itself was named "Werner-Seelenbinder-Kampfbahn", but as Communism became a bad word in West Berlin, it was renamed "Stadion Neukölln" in 1949. A number of schools, streets and sporting facilities in the former East Germany were named after him. The Werner Seelenbinder Wrestling Tournament is still (2004) held once a year in Berlin. However, the lack of impartiality by both the anti-communist West Germans and the pro-communist East Germans, who raised Werner Seelenbinder to the status of an icon, means that today his historical importance is rather controversial. In an article in the socialist German newspaper Neues Deutschland of 2 August 2004, the director of the Berlin Sports Museum Martina Behrendt said that his role in the resistance movement had been exaggerated in the GDR, and that there were no reliable biographies.
In 1964, The Nordic Yards Warnemünde ship yard (the former Warnowwerft), launched a 7,704 gross tonnage cargo chip named Werner Seelenbinder. She was scrapped in 1988 - before the collapse of the GDR http://www.shipspotting.com/gallery/photo.php?lid=1577451. She remained named after the athlete throughout her career, apart from her final voyage to Alang for breaking up, for which she was re-registered and renamed MILOS-1.
On 2 August 2004 a commemorative speech was held in front of the Neukölln stadium, where Seelenbinder's ashes were buried, by the German socialist PDS party, one hundred years after Seelenbinder's birth. Party members spoke of their regret that the stadium had been renamed. Others mentioned with sadness the renaming of the eastern German "Werner-Seelenbinder-Halle" as "Velodrom im Europasportpark" in 1990 and the renaming of the "Werner-Seelenbinder-Turm" in Leipzig as the "Glockenturm". On 24 October 2004, the 60th anniversary of Seelenbinder's death, the Neukölln stadium was once again renamed the "Werner-Seelenbinder-Stadion" in his memory.
Seelenbinder was inducted to the Germany's Sports Hall of Fame in 2008.

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==


