[[Yeha]]

CATEGORIES: Capitals of former nations, Populated places in the Tigray Region, Dʿmt, History of Ethiopia

Yeha (Ge'ez ይሐ yiḥa, older ESA 12px12px ḤW)E. Bernand, A.J. Drewes, R. Schneiderm Recueil des inscriptions de l'éthiopie des périodes pré-axoumite et axoumite. Académie des inscriptions et belle-lettres. Diffusion de Broccard: Paris, 1991, pp. 109-110 is a town in northern Ethiopia, located in the Mehakelegnaw Zone of the Tigray Region. The Central Statistical Agency has not published an estimate for this village's 2005 population.  

==Archeology==

The oldest standing structure in Ethiopia is located in Yeha: the temple of Yeha. This is a tower built in the Sabaean style, and dated through comparison with ancient structures in South Arabia to around 700 BC. Although no radiocarbon dating testing has been performed on samples from site, this date for the Great Tower is supported by local inscriptions.David W. Phillipson, Ancient Churches of Ethiopia (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2009), p. 36 David Phillipson attributes its "excellent preservation" to two factors, "the care with which its original builders ensured a level   foundation, firmly placed on the uneven bedrock; and to its rededication -- perhaps as early as the sixth century  AD -- for use as a Christian church." Two other archeological sites at Yeha include Grat Beal Gebri, a ruined complex distinguished by a portico 10 meters wide and two sets of square pillars, and a graveyard containing several rock-hewn shaft tombs first investigated in the early 1960s. One authority has speculated that one of these tombs contained a royal burial, while another believes the ancient residential area was likely one kilometer to the east of the modern village.Phillipson, Ancient Churches, pp. 32, 37
Yeha is also the location of an Ethiopian Orthodox monastery, founded according to tradition by Abba Aftse, one of the Nine Saints. In his account of Ethiopia, Francisco Álvares mentions visiting this town in 1520 (which he called "Abbafaçem"), and provides a description of the ancient tower, the monastery, and the local church.Francisco Alvarez, The Prester John of the Indies translated by C. F. Beckingham and G. W. B. Huntingford (Cambridge: Hakluyt Society, 1961), pp. 140f This church was either the rededicated Great Temple, or a now destroyed building which the Deutsche Aksum-Expedition described in the early 20th century. (The current structure, which exhibits Aksumite architectural features, was built between 1948 and 1949.)Phillipson, Ancient Churches, p. 37
Yeha has also been the site of a number of archaeological excavations, beginning in 1952 by the Ethiopian Institute of Archeology. Although interrupted during the Derg regime, excavations were resumed in 1993 by a French archaeological team.[tpl]Citation needed|date=July 2009[/tpl]

==Notes==

==External links==


