[[Roger Sherman Baldwin]]

CATEGORIES: 1793 births, 1863 deaths, Governors of Connecticut, People from New Haven, Connecticut, United States Senators from Connecticut, Yale University alumni, Litchfield Law School alumni, Burials at Grove Street Cemetery, Connecticut Whigs, Connecticut Republicans, Whig Party United States Senators, Whig Party state governors of the United States, Sherman family, American people of English descent

Not to be confused with Roger Nash Baldwin, 20th Century founder of the American Civil Liberties Union.

Roger Sherman Baldwin (January 4, 1793 – February 19, 1863) was an American lawyer involved in the Amistad case, who later became the 32nd Governor of Connecticut and a United States Senator.

==Early life==

Baldwin was son of Simeon Baldwin and Rebecca Sherman in New Haven, Connecticut. He was the maternal grandson of notable founding father Roger Sherman (the only person to sign all four great state papers of the U.S.: the Continental Association, the Declaration of Independence, the Articles of Confederation and the ConstitutionRoger Sherman  Architect of the Capitol. Retrieved February 14, 2007.). He attended Hopkins School, and entered Yale College at the age of fourteen, and graduated with high honors in 1811. At Yale, Baldwin was a member of the Linonian Society. After leaving Yale he studied law in his father's office in New Haven, and also in the Litchfield Law School, and was admitted to the bar in 1814. Although repeatedly called into public office, he devoted himself through life to the profession of his choice, attaining the highest distinction, especially in the discussion of questions of law. His defense in 1841, of the rights of the Africans of the Amistad, is particularly celebrated, both for his ability and for the importance of the case.

==Political career==

After having been a member of the city government in New Haven, in 1826 and 1828, Mr. Baldwin was elected in 1837 and again in 1838, a member of the Connecticut State Senate. In 1840 and 1841 he represented the town of New Haven in the General Assembly. He was chosen Governor of Connecticut in 1844 and was reelected in 1845. On the death of Hon. J. W. Huntington in 1847, Baldwin was appointed by Governor Clark Bissell to fill the vacancy thus occasioned in the United States Senate, and in December of that year he took his seat as a member of that body. He was elected by the Legislature in the following May to the same position, which he held until 1851. After that period he held no public office, except that he was one of the presidential electors in the canvass of 1860, and by appointment of Governor William Alfred Buckingham was a delegate to the Peace Convention which met in Washington, in 1861, by request of the State of Virginia.  He was described as a devout Christian who studied the Bible every day.
Baldwin died in New Haven, February 19, 1863; at the age of 70 and was interred at Grove Street Cemetery. A biographical discourse was pronounced at his funeral by Rev. Dr. Dutton, which was printed in the New Englander for April 1863, and was also published as a pamphlet.

==Family==

He was grandson of Roger Sherman, son of Simeon Baldwin, nephew of Ebenezer Baldwin, husband of Emily Pitkin Perkins, father of Connecticut Governor Simeon Eben Baldwin, grandfather of New York Supreme Court Justice Edward Baldwin Whitney, and the great-grandfather of the famed Princeton University mathematics professor Hassler Whitney.

==Roger Baldwin in popular culture==

A simplified version of the events regarding the Amistad case was made into a movie called Amistad in 1997 in which Matthew McConaughey portrayed Roger Sherman Baldwin.

==References==

==External links==


