[[Magpie (TV series)]]

CATEGORIES: 1968 British television programme debuts, 1980 British television programme endings, ITV children's television programmes, Television series by FremantleMedia

Magpie was a British children's television programme shown on ITV from 30 July 1968 to 6 June 1980. It was a magazine format show intended to compete with the BBC's Blue Peter, but attempted to be more "hip", focusing more on popular culture. The show's creators Lewis Rudd and Sue Turner named the programme Magpie as a reference to the magpie's habit of collecting small items, and because of "mag" being evocative of "magazine", and "pie" being evocative of a collection of ingredients. 

==Broadcast history==

The programme, made by Thames Television, was first transmitted on 30 July 1968 which was Thames Television's first day of broadcasting, and was shown weekly until 1969. From that point, until it ended on 6 June 1980, it went out twice a week with approximately 1,000 episodes being made, each 25 minutes in duration. It was not fully networked to all other ITV companies until the autumn of 1969.
The first presenters were the former BBC Radio 1 disc jockey Pete Brady, Susan Stranks and Tony Bastable. Brady left the show in 1969 to be replaced by Douglas Rae, and Bastable left in 1972 when he was replaced by Mick Robertson. Jenny Hanley replaced Susan Stranks in 1974. This lineup remained until 1977, when Tommy Boyd replaced Rae.
Like Blue Peter, Magpie featured appeals for various causes and charities. Notably, however, it asked for cash donations rather than stamps or secondhand goods, familiar on Blue Peter. The cash totaliser was a long strip of paper which ran out of the studio and along the adjacent corridor walls. Unlike the BBC programme, Magpie was unscripted and the presenters were free to improvise the presentation of the show.Magpie DVD ASIN: B00272F3TW Release date: 29 Jun 2009
The show's mascot was a magpie called Murgatroyd.

==Theme song==

The theme tune was played by the Spencer Davis Group under the alias of The Murgatroyd Band, and composed by Eddie Hardin (lead voc., keyb.), Ray Fenwick (guit.) and Spencer Davis (guit.). The main lyric was cribbed from  an old children's nursery rhyme:
or, alternatively,
The first seven lines of this song (from "One for sorrow" to "Seven for a secret never to be told") have been used in the last verse of the song "Magpie", by Patrick Wolf.
The rhyme refers to an old English superstition concerning the portent of the number of magpies seen together in a flock. The TV programme version altered the final lines to:

==Steam engine==

In 1973, Magpie adopted a steam engine, "Black 5" 44806 and renamed her "Magpie" (Blue Peter already had a locomotive named after their show). After an eventful history, it is still being used today on the Llangollen Railway, although now under another name.
Magpie also adopted a boat originally called "Mankadu", and renamed "Thames Magpie". Its current whereabouts are unknown.

==External links==

==References==


