[[USA Tuesday Night Fights]]

CATEGORIES: 1980s American television series, 1990s American television series, Boxing television series, USA Network shows, 1982 American television series debuts, 1998 American television series endings, USA Network Sports

USA Tuesday Night Fights is a television boxing show.  It aired from October 1, 1982 through August 25, 1998 on the USA Network; at one time it was the longest continually-running boxing show on television.
USA Tuesday Night Fights was hosted by Al Albert and former lightweight champion Sean O'Grady. Bill Macatee was often a substitute announcer for Albert.
The program, for most of its time on air, was sponsored by Budweiser, and often referred to on air as Budweiser Presents Tuesday Night Fights.

==Notable fights==

Few world title fights were presented in this show, one of the notable ones being when Vinny Pazienza, a former world Lightweight champion, moved up in weight and captured the WBA world Jr. Middleweight championship with an eleventh round knockout of Gilbert Dele. Pazienza would ultimately relinquish the title following a car accident the following year. Written off from boxing by doctors after the accident, Pazienza would return to the ring with a win over Luis Santana, a fight which also aired on Tuesday Night Fights.
Another title fight aired by USA was the 1988 IBF featherweight title bout between defending champion Calvin Grove and contender Jorge Paez that took place in Mexicali, Mexico. The fight was significant in that it was the last ever title match fought with a fifteen-round maximum. The fight went the distance, with Paez earning a majority decision.
Other shows included Roberto Durán's one hundredth fight, the returns of both George Foreman and Larry Holmes, and a show staged inside a marine aircraft carrier. Another fight featured on Tuesday Night Fights was Andrew Golota's infamous fight against Samson Po'uha in 1995 which saw the Polish fighter bite the neck of his opponent.

===Other world champions to fight on the show===

Many other world champions fought on this show, including Oscar de La Hoya, Floyd Mayweather Jr., Roy Jones Jr., Arturo Gatti, Fernando Vargas, Hector Camacho and Antonio Tarver. Championship Pay Per View bouts were also recast on the show such as Julio César Chávez's eighth round knockout win over Joey Gamache.

==Rebroadcasts==

In June 2006 CSI Sports, through its FIGHT Sports division, began airing a compilation of some of the best knockouts from the Tuesday Night Fights series titled USA Tuesday Night Fights: KNOCKOUTS! on pay-per-view. Narrated by current Washington Redskins play-by-play man Larry Michael, the sixty-minute series featured various fights from throughout the years. Common features were "In Case You Missed It...", featuring some memorable moments from Tuesday Night Fights, "KO Time", which featured very quick knockouts, and "Who Won This One?", which was the last fight of the program and was promoted several times during the broadcast with viewers encouraged to pick which of the two men won the bout. Reruns of this series air across the country on various sports channels, including MSG Plus.
The Tuesday Night Fights: KNOCKOUTS! series was also released on DVD in a two-volume box set.
CSI later came out with a series called Wide World of Fights, which has a much broader scope and includes mixed martial arts, kickboxing, and other combat sports footage in addition to some of the fights that were originally part of the Tuesday Night Fights compilation series. This series also airs on many of the same stations that carry Tuesday Night Fights: KNOCKOUTS!.

==See also==

==External links==


