</ref>  He also put on one of the first shows of [[Eliot Porter]]'s work two years later. He  encouraged younger photographer [[Todd Webb]] to develop his own style and immerse himself in the medium; Stieglitz was considered at the time to have been the "godfather of modern photography".<ref name=twsOctBEnjh>
[/ref]
The next year the Cleveland Museum of Art mounted the first major exhibition of Stieglitz's work outside of his own galleries. He spent many hours laboring over the choices and making sure that each print was perfect, and once again he worked himself into exhaustion. O'Keeffe spent most of the year in New Mexico.

===Last years (1938–1946)===

In early 1938, Stieglitz suffered a serious heart attack, one of six coronary or angina attacks that would strike him over the next eight years. Each would leave him increasingly weakened, and his recovery times would lengthen after each one. Still, as soon as he was strong enough he would return to The Place and pick up where he left off. In his absence,Dorothy Norman managed the gallery. Stieglitz would often sleep on a small cot at the gallery, either too weak to leave or not wanting to return to his usually empty home. O'Keeffe remained in her Southwest home from spring to fall of this period.
In the summer of 1946 Stieglitz suffered a fatal stroke. He remained in a coma long enough for O'Keeffe to finally return home. When she got to his hospital room Dorothy Norman was there with him. She left immediately, and O'Keeffe was with him when he died. According to his wishes, a simple funeral was held with only twenty of his closest friends and family in attendance. Stieglitz was cremated, and O'Keeffe and his niece Elizabeth Davidson took his ashes to Lake George. O'Keeffe never revealed exactly where she distributed them, saying only "I put him where he could hear the water."
The day after the funeral, O'Keeffe called Norman to demand "absolute control" over An American Place. She told Norman to clear all of her things out of the gallery, and ended by saying that she considered Dorothy Norman's relationship with Stieglitz to be "absolutely disgusting."
Stieglitz had long recognized his importance and impact in art through his field; photography as a new and unique art form; and, in Modern Art in general.  He had, more than any other American of his time (over fifty years), collected, exhibited, bought, sold, and promoted Modern Art, in both its works, and as patron to its authors.  He had supported them directly; as well as having lived in and through their culture and times.  He was the American catalyst for Modern Art, in its collection, exhibit, appreciation, and interpretation.  Seeking to assure for posterity his personal works, as well as his efforts on behalf of Modern Art, Stieglitz conceived and promulgated a detailed Last Will and Testament (Probated under New York State law); in which he designated his wife Georgia O’Keeffe as the Executrix, and life tenant, of his estate, and of his Will.  
As Executrix and life-tenant O'Keeffe spent the next three years allotting and divesting the Stieglitz estate according to his wishes.  Stieglitz had more than 3,000 photographs of his own, 850 works of art mostly by the emerging and established Modern artists that he represented, 580 prints by other photographers, an enormous collection of books and writings, plus nearly 50,000 pieces of correspondence. She was given the sole authority over his belongings, and took three years to personally sort through every piece.  The timing of her disposition of the collection art works was affected by the terms of the his Will; the monetary value of the whole estate (including its artworks); the laws of New York State; and the circumstances of his beneficiaries.
O’Keeffe was 23 years younger than Stieglitz, and as life tenant of his estate she did not have to immediately dispose of his artworks; she was only bound to the terms and conditions of his will, as to whom the works were to be gifted to; and the terms and conditions she was to impose upon the recipients of such gifts.  However, the circumstances of one of Stieglitz’s beneficiaries, the laws of New York State, and the appreciating value of the art collection, radically adjusted the time frame of the artworks disposition.
The estate also included substantial monetary assets (cash, annuities, stocks, bonds, other securities); as well as the estimated (and escalating) value of his own artworks, and the works he had bought and collected for his galleries.  As a long-time collector Stieglitz had purchased the works of many artists (Picasso, Monet, Cézanne, and Lautrec) early in their careers or early in the artists’ notoriety.  These works were, as a consequence of their appreciation in value, quickly rising to be very soon worth substantially more than fifty percent (50%) of the total value of his estate.
Under New York State, Estate Law, no Testator (Stieglitz), could donate, will, gift, or otherwise dispose of more than 50% of their estate through charitable donation; when, the Testator was survived by a spouse or minor/idiot child (Section 17, Decedent's Estate Law).  Stieglitz’s will had directed his entire artworks collection be gifted to non-profit corporations (museums, colleges, art institutes, etc.).  But at the time of his death, he was survived by a daughter who was disabled (a minor/idiot child).  Therefore, the plan and intent of his last-will-and-testament was in serious long-term jeopardy of being declared illegal under New York state law, in that, the longer the works were held by the estate; the greater they would grow in monetary value; as a proportion of the entire estate; thereby effectively blocking their charitable bequest to non-profit corporations, as his Will had intended they should.
In order to resolve the possible violation of the Decedent's Estate Law Ms. O’Keeffe petitioned the Surrogate's Court of New York County (NYC), seeking permission to donate all of Stieglitz's photographs and art work, pursuant to Article (SECOND) of the Will, to nonprofit institutions that met the conditions set forth in Article (THIRD), the institutions were; the National Gallery of Art in Washington DC, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Museum of Modern Art, Philadelphia Museum of Art, Art Institute of Chicago, Boston Museum of Fine Arts, Library of Congress, New Mexico Museum of Art and Fisk University. His correspondence went to the Beinecke Rare Books Room and Manuscript Library at Yale University.
These charitable donations constituted less than 50% of the estate's (1946) total value; and thus, were within the limits of Section 17 of the Decedent's Estate Law.  Ms. O’Keeffe additionally petitioned the court to waive her individual right in life tenancy to bequeath any remaining part of Mr. Stieglitz's estate to charity; and, acting in her capacity as the estate's Executrix, she renounced the right of the estate to do the same.  The court granted her petition, ordering that "all of the photographs and other works of art be entirely transferred and delivered to the charitable and educational institutions (as named) within thirty (30) days".  As directed by the Will, the remainder of Mr. Stieglitz's estate was conveyed to Ms. O'Keeffe as life tenant.  On June 8, 1949 by letter signed by Ms. O'Keeffe in her capacity as Executrix of the Stieglitz Estate, title to the respective pieces of the Stieglitz Collection were transferred to the various named charities.
When O’Keeffe had concluded her tasks as Executrix, and had effected the transfer of title of all donated art works to the named non-profit corporations according to articles SECOND AND THIRD of Stieglitz’s will; she offered the court her resignation as Executrix, and prayed the court to release her from; and to extinguish, all of the special powers of Executrix she had been granted over the estate.  The court in its final order (in regards to her duties as Executrix) granted her request.  Thereafter O’Keeffe retained her life-tenancy over the remainder of the estate upon which the will had granted her life tenancy.  Upon her death (in 1986), the property she had retained in life-tenancy reverted back to the Stieglitz estate, for disposition according to the terms of his will.

==Key Set==

During the course of his long career, Stieglitz produced more than 2,500 mounted photographs. After his death O’Keeffe committed to assembling the best and most complete set of his photographs, selecting in most cases what she considered to be only the finest print of each image he made. In some cases she included slightly different versions of the same image, and these series are invaluable for their insights about Stieglitz's aesthetic composition. She chose only those prints that Stieglitz had personally mounted, since he did not consider a work to be finished until he completed this step. In 1949 she donated the first part of what she called the "key set" of 1,317 Stieglitz photographs to the National Gallery of Art in Washington, DC. In 1980 she added to the set another 325 photographs taken by Stieglitz of her, including many nudes. Now numbering 1,642 photographs, it is the largest, most complete collection of Stieglitz's work anywhere in the world. In 2002 the National Gallery published a two-volume, 1,012-page catalog that reproduced the complete key set along with detailed annotations about each photograph.

==Legacy==

==Quotes==

==Gallery==

Image:Stieglitz-Hand.jpg|The Hand of Man, 1902
Image:Stieglitz-Katherine.jpg|Katherine, 1905
Image:Stieglitz-MissSR.jpg|Miss S.R., 1905
Image:Stieglitz-Dirigible.jpg|Dirigible, 1910
Image:Stieglitz-NewYorkOldNew.jpg|Old and New New York, 1910
Image:Stieglitz-Snapshot1.jpg|A Snapshot: Paris, 1911 (one of two with same title)
Image:Stieglitz-Snapshot2.jpg|A Snapshot: Paris, 1911 (one of two with same title)
File:StieglitzEKLakeGeorge1916.JPG|Ellen Koeniger, Lake George, 1916.
File:O'Keeffe-(hands).jpg|Georgia O'Keeffe, Hands, 1918

==Notes==

==Further reading==

==External links==

 |url= http://www.vam.ac.uk/collections/photography/past_exhns/stieglitz/
 |title= Stieglitz portraits of Georgia O'Keeffe
 |work= Photography
 |accessdate= 2007-06-16 }}


