</ref> using the [[torsion balance]] pendulum, in 1889. [tpl]As of|2008[/tpl], no deviation from universality, and thus from Galilean equivalence, has ever been found, at least to the precision 10<sup>−12</sup>. More precise experimental efforts are still being carried out.
The universality of free-fall only applies to systems in which gravity is the only acting force. All other forces, especially friction and air resistance, must be absent or at least negligible. For example, if a hammer and a feather are dropped from the same height through the air on Earth, the feather will take much longer to reach the ground; the feather is not really in free-fall because the force of air resistance upwards against the feather is comparable to the downward force of gravity. On the other hand, if the experiment is performed in a vacuum, in which there is no air resistance, the hammer and the feather should hit the ground at exactly the same time (assuming the acceleration of both objects towards each other, and of the ground towards both objects, for its own part, is negligible). This can easily be done in a high school laboratory by dropping the objects in transparent tubes that have the air removed with a vacuum pump. It is even more dramatic when done in an environment that naturally has a vacuum, as David Scott did on the surface of the Moon during Apollo 15.
A stronger version of the equivalence principle, known as the Einstein equivalence principle or the strong equivalence principle, lies at the heart of the general theory of relativity. Einstein's equivalence principle states that within sufficiently small regions of space-time, it is impossible to distinguish between a uniform acceleration and a uniform gravitational field. Thus, the theory postulates that the force acting on a massive object caused by a gravitational field is a result of the object's tendency to move in a straight line (in other words its inertia) and should therefore be a function of its inertial mass and the strength of the gravitational field.

===Origin of mass===

In theoretical physics, a mass generation mechanism is a theory which attempts to explain the origin of mass from the most fundamental laws of physics. To date, a number of different models have been proposed which advocate different views at the origin of mass. The problem is complicated by the fact that the notion of mass is strongly related to the gravitational interaction but a theory of the latter has not been yet reconciled with the currently popular model of particle physics, known as the Standard Model.

==Pre-Newtonian concepts==

===Weight as an amount===

The concept of amount is very old and predates recorded history.  Humans, at some early era, realized that the weight of a collection of similar objects was directly proportional to the number of objects in the collection:
where W is the weight of the collection of similar objects and n is the number of objects in the collection.  Proportionality, by definition, implies that two values have a constant ratio:
An early use of this relationship is a balance scale, which balances the force of one object's weight against the force of another object's weight. The two sides of a balance scale are close enough that the objects experience similar gravitational fields.  Hence, if they have similar masses then their weights will also be similar.  This allows the scale, by comparing weights, to also compare masses.
Consequently, historical weight standards were often defined in terms of amounts.  The Romans, for example, used the carob seed (carat or siliqua) as a measurement standard.  If an object's weight was equivalent to 1728 carob seeds, then the object was said to weigh one Roman pound.  If, on the other hand, the object's weight was equivalent to 144 carob seeds then the object was said to weigh one Roman ounce (uncia).  The Roman pound and ounce were both defined in terms of different sized collections of the same common mass standard, the carob seed.  The ratio of a Roman ounce (144 carob seeds) to a Roman pound (1728 carob seeds) was:

===Planetary motion===

In 1600 AD, Johannes Kepler sought employment with Tycho Brahe, who had some of the most precise astronomical data available.  Using Brahe's precise observations of the planet Mars, Kepler  spent the next five years developing his own method for characterizing planetary motion. In 1609, Johannes Kepler published his three laws of planetary motion, explaining how the planets orbit the Sun. In Kepler's final planetary model, he described planetary orbits as following elliptical paths with the Sun at a focal point of the ellipse. Kepler discovered that the square of the orbital period of each planet is directly proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis of its orbit, or equivalently, that the ratio of these two values is constant for all planets in the Solar System.[ref]This constant ratio was later shown to be a direct measure of the Sun's active gravitational mass; it has units of distance cubed per time squared, and is known as the standard gravitational parameter:
On 25 August 1609, Galileo Galilei demonstrated his first telescope to a group of Venetian merchants, and in early January of 1610, Galileo observed four dim objects near Jupiter, which he mistook for stars.  However, after a few days of observation, Galileo realized that these "stars" were in fact orbiting Jupiter.  These four objects (later named the Galilean moons in honor of their discoverer) were the first celestial bodies observed to orbit something other than the Earth or Sun.  Galileo continued to observe these moons over the next eighteen months, and by the middle of 1611 he had obtained remarkably accurate estimates for their periods.

===Galilean free fall===

Sometime prior to 1638, Galileo turned his attention to the phenomenon of objects in free fall, attempting to characterize these motions. Galileo was not the first to investigate Earth's gravitational field, nor was he the first to accurately describe its fundamental characteristics.  However, Galileo's reliance on scientific experimentation to establish physical principles would have a profound effect on future generations of scientists. It is unclear if these were just hypothetical experiments used to illustrate a concept, or if they were real experiments performed by Galileo, but the results obtained from these experiments were both realistic and compelling.  A biography by Galileo's pupil Vincenzo Viviani stated that Galileo had dropped balls of the same material, but different masses, from the Leaning Tower of Pisa to demonstrate that their time of descent was independent of their mass.[ref]At the time when Viviani asserts that the experiment took place, Galileo had not yet formulated the final version of his law of free fall. He had, however, formulated an earlier version which predicted that bodies of the same material falling through the same medium would fall at the same speed. See 
[/ref] In support of this conclusion, Galileo had advanced the following theoretical argument: He asked if two bodies of different masses and different rates of fall are tied by a string, does the combined system fall faster because it is now more massive, or does the lighter body in its slower fall hold back the heavier body?  The only convincing resolution to this question is that all bodies must fall at the same rate.
A later experiment was described in Galileo's Two New Sciences published in 1638.  One of Galileo's fictional characters, Salviati, describes an experiment using a bronze ball and a wooden ramp.  The wooden ramp was "12 cubits long, half a cubit wide and three finger-breadths thick" with a straight, smooth, polished groove.  The groove was lined with "parchment, also smooth and polished as possible".  And into this groove was placed "a hard, smooth and very round bronze ball".  The ramp was inclined at various angles to slow the acceleration enough so that the elapsed time could be measured.  The ball was allowed to roll a known distance down the ramp, and the time taken for the ball to move the known distance was measured.  The time was measured using a water clock described as follows:

 |year=1954
 |editor1-last=Crew |editor1-first=H.
 |editor2-last=de Salvio |editor2-first=A.
 |title=Mathematical Discourses and Demonstrations, Relating to Two New Sciences
 |url=http://oll.libertyfund.org/index.php?option=com_staticxt&staticfile=show.php%3Ftitle=753&Itemid=99999999
