[[Maroboduus]]

CATEGORIES: 37 deaths, Ancient people, Ancient Germanic rulers, Marcomannic people, 1st-century BC births, 1st-century deaths

Maroboduus (born c. in 30 BC, died in AD 37), was king of the Marcomanni. The name "Maroboduus" can be broken down into two Celtic elements, māro- meaning "great" (cf. Welsh mawr, Irish mór), and bodwos meaning "raven" (cf. Irish badhbh).[tpl]cn|date=December 2012[/tpl] As there was extensive mingling of Germanic tribes and Celts in this period, a Germanic or mixed Germanic-Celtic tribe led by a man with a Celtic name would be nothing unusual.

==Biography==

Maroboduus was born into a noble family of the Marcomanni. As a young man he lived in Italy and enjoyed the favour of the Emperor Augustus.Strabo 7, 1, 3, p. 290 The Marcomanni had been beaten utterly by the Romans in 10 BC. About 9 BC Maroboduus returned to Germany and became ruler of his people. To deal with the threat of Roman expansion into the Rhine-Danube basin he led the Marcomanni to the area later known as Bohemia to be outside the range of the Roman influence. There he took the title of a king and organized a confederation of several neighboring Germanic tribes.Strabo 7, 1, 3, p. 290; Marcus Velleius Paterculus, Compendium of Roman History 2, 108 He was the first documented ruler of Bohemia.
Augustus planned in 6 AD to destroy the kingdom of Maroboduus, which he considered to be too dangerous for the Romans. The later Emperor Tiberius commanded twelve legions to attack the Marcomanni. But the outbreak of a revolt in Illyria, and the need for troops there, forced Tiberius to conclude a treaty with Maroboduus and to recognize him as king.Velleius Paterculus, Compendium of Roman History 2, 109, 5; Cassius Dio, Roman History 55, 28, 6-7

==War with Arminius and death==

Rivalry between him and Arminius, the Cheruscan leader who inflicted the devastating defeat at the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest on the Romans under Publius Quinctilius Varus in 9 AD, prevented a concerted attack on Roman territory across the Rhine in the north (by Arminius) and in the Danube basin in the south (by Maroboduus). 
However, according to the 1st century AD historian Marcus Velleius Paterculus, Arminius sent Varus' head to Maroboduus. But the king of the Marcomanni sent it to Augustus.Velleius Paterculus, Compendium of Roman History 2, 119: "caput eius abscisum latumque ad Maroboduum et ab eo missum ad Caesarem" In the revenge war of Tiberius and Germanicus against the Cherusci Maroboduus stayed neutral.
In 17 AD, war broke out between Arminius and Maroboduus, and after an indecisive battle Maroboduus withdrew into the area now known as Bohemia in 18 AD.Tacitus, Annals 2, 44-46 In the next year Catualda, a young Marcomannic nobleman living in exile among the Gutones, returned – perhaps by a subversive Roman intervention – and defeated Maroboduus.Tacitus, The Annals 2.62 The deposed king had to flee to Italy and Tiberius detained him 18 years in Ravenna. There Maroboduus died in 37 AD.Tacitus, The Annals 2.63 Catualda was in turn defeated by the Hermunduri Vibilius, after which the realm was ruled by the Quadian Vannius. Vannius was himself also deposed by Vibilius, in coordination with his nephews Vangio and Sido, who then ruled as Roman client kings.

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==


