[[Rom (Star Trek)]]

CATEGORIES: Ferengi, Fictional engineers, Star Trek: Deep Space Nine characters, Fictional waiting staff, Fictional secret agents and spies, Fictional heads of state, Fictional_managers, Fictional politicians, Fictional characters introduced in 1993, Fictional trade unionists

Rom is a recurring character on Star Trek: Deep Space Nine. He is played by Max Grodénchik. 
Rom is a Ferengi, the son of Keldar and Ishka. He is Quark's younger brother, and the father of  Nog.

==Overview==

Born around 2335, Rom did not have the business acumen typically associated with Ferengi (they said he didn't have the 'lobes' for business). He had a knack for fixing things, but until around 2372 he worked exclusively as a waiter and stock boy in his brother's bar on Deep Space Nine.  (In the first episode, he was credited only as "Ferengi Pit Boss"). Rom frequently displays a lack of confidence, largely subsequent to Quark's habit of belittling him.  However, there is evidence to suggest that Quark was attempting to protect Rom from inevitable failure by preventing him from venturing into business for himself.  Nevertheless, after four years living among Federation and Bajoran citizens on the station, and possibly inspired by his son Nog's admission to Starfleet (an action that made him very proud), Rom left the bar to become an engineer in the Bajoran Militia.
Odo once described Rom as "an idiot, who couldn't fix a straw if it was bent".  As it turns out, Rom's social ineptitude is starkly contrasted by his prodigious talent as an engineer and he played an important role in the station's participation in the Dominion War.  In 2373, Rom designed and distributed a self-replicating minefield that blocked access to the Bajoran wormhole and prevented Dominion reinforcements from entering the Alpha Quadrant for several months.
His first wife, Prinadora, bore his son Nog. She stayed behind on Ferenginar when Rom first came to Deep Space Nine, but the marriage was later dissolved, with her stealing the bulk of his profit. Rom eventually married Leeta, a Bajoran Dabo girl employed at Quark's bar, after going through a period of doubt about her love due to being burned in his first marriage.
When Grand Nagus Zek became less greedy after coming into contact with the Bajoran prophets, he founded the Ferengi Benevolent Association and appointed Rom chairman ("Prophet Motive"). Acting in a manner atypical of himself, Rom took advantage of the opportunity and embezzled money from the charity.
Throughout his seven years on DS9, Rom underwent great personal growth as a colleague, parent, and in almost every other aspect of his life and career. He also proved valuable, on several occasions, in helping his people deal with important issues facing their society. In 2375, to the shock of everyone, including Rom himself, Zek appointed Rom to succeed him as Grand Nagus, becoming the new leader of the Ferengi people and economy. Rom's political affiliations are frequently hinted as being left-wing and more liberal than those of his brothers. In the episode 'Bar Association' he forms a union of the bar staff at Quark's bar and quotes Karl Marx ("Workers of the world, unite!") You have nothing to lose but your chains") as well as demonstrating admiration for Miles O'Brien's ancestor, Sean Aloysius O'Brien, a union leader.

==Appearances==

Rom appears in the following episodes:
Season 1
Season 2
Season 3
Season 4
Season 5
Season 6
Season 7

==External links==


