[[Citron]]

CATEGORIES: Citron, Citrus, Fruits originating in Asia, Flora of East Asia, Flora of India, Medicinal plants of Asia, Fragrances, Essential oils, Sukkot, Four Species, False friends, Garden plants of Asia, Ornamental trees, Flora of Nepal, Plants described in 1753

The citron is a fragrant citrus fruit, botanically classified as Citrus medica by both the Swingle and Tanaka systems. The designation medica given it by Linnaeus apparently is derived from its ancient name, "Median or Persian apple",Cedrát - Citrus medica a Citrus limonimedica that was reported by Theophrastus,Theophrastus, Enquiry into Plants, IV.4.2. who believed it to be native to Persia or the land of the Medes; there is no relation to medicinal uses of the fruit. Theophrastus notes its smooth sharp thorns, like those of a pear, the very fragrant, but inedible 'apple', which keeps moths from clothes, and the fact that "it bears its 'apples' at all season; for when some have been gathered, the flower of others is on the tree and it is ripening others... This tree, as has been said, grows in Persia and Media." Citron was the first of the citrus fruits to appear in the Mediterranean Basin.
The fruit's name derives ultimately from Latin, citrus, also the origin of the genus name, and as a result it has many similar names in many European languages, e.g. cederat, cédrat, cedro, etc. A source of confusion is that citron or similar words in French, Hungarian, Finnish, Latvian, the West Slavic languages, and all Germanic languages but English are false friends, as they refer to the lemon. Indeed, into the 16th century, the English name citron included the lemon and perhaps the lime as well.Citron at the Oxford English dictionary http://www.oed.com/ Most other European languages, from Albanian and English to Spanish, use variants of the Arabic word laymun "limon". 

==Uses==

While the lemon or orange are peeled to consume their pulpy and juicy segments, the citron's pulp is dry, containing a small quantity of insipid juice, if any. The main content of a citron fruit is the thick white rind, which adheres to the segments, and cannot be separated from them easily.
Thus, from ancient through medieval times, the citron was used mainly for medical purposes: to combat seasickness, pulmonary troubles, intestinal ailments, and other disorders. The essential oil of the flavedo (the outermost, pigmented layer of rind) was also regarded as an antibiotic.[ref]Natural healing Website
[/ref] Citron juice with wine was considered an effective antidote to poison, as Theophrastus reported.
Today the citron is used for the fragrance or zest of its flavedo, but the most important part is still the inner rind (known as pith or albedo), which is a fairly important article in international trade and is widely employed in the food industry as succade,[ref]The Purdue University
[/ref] as it is known when it is candied in sugar. There is a rising market for the citron in the United States for the use of its soluble fiber found in its thick albedo.[ref]Scholarly Document
The citron is also used by Jews (the word for it in Hebrew is etrog) for a religious ritual during the Feast of Tabernacles; therefore is considered as a Jewish symbol, and is found on various Hebrew antiques and archeological findings.See Etrog  Citrons used for ritual purposes cannot be grown by grafting branches.
In Iran, the citron's thick white rind is used to make jam; in Pakistan the fruit is used to make jam as well as pickled; in South Indian cuisine, the citron is widely used in pickles and preserves.

===Medicinal Uses===

In Ayurvedic system of medicine, the fruit juice is used for treating conditions like nausea, vomiting, excessive thirst etc.
The fruit juice has a high content of Vitamin C and used medicinally as an anthelminthic, appetizer, tonic, in cough, rheumatism, vomiting, flatulence, haemorrhoids, skin diseases and weak eye sight. National R&D Facility for Rasayana

==Description and variation==

===Fruit===

The citron fruit is usually ovate or oblong, narrowing towards the stylar end. However, the citron's fruit shape is highly variable, due to the large quantity of albedo, which forms independently according to the fruits' position on the tree, twig orientation, and many other factors. The rind is leathery, furrowed, and adherent. The inner portion is thick, white and fleshy; the outer is uniformly thin and very fragrant. The pulp is usually acidic, but also can be sweet, and even pulpless varieties are found.
Most citron varieties contain a large number of monoembryonic seeds. They are white, with dark innercoats and red-purplish chalazal spots for the acidic varieties, and colorless for the sweet ones. Some citron varieties are also distinct, having  persistent styles, that do not fall off after fecundation. Those are usually promoted for etrog use.
Some citrons have medium-sized oil bubbles at the outer surface, medially distant to each other. Some varieties are ribbed and faintly warted on the outer surface. There is also a fingered citron variety called Buddha's hand.
The color varies from green, when unripe, to a yellow-orange when overripe. The citron does not fall off the tree and can reach 8–10 pounds (4–5 kg) if not picked before fully mature.[ref]Un curieux Cedrat marocain, Chapot 1950.

===Plant===

Citrus medica is a slow-growing shrub or small tree that reaches a height of about [tpl]convert|8|to|15|ft|m|0|abbr=on[/tpl]. It has irregular straggling branches and stiff twigs and long spines at the leaf axils. The evergreen leaves are green and lemon-scented with slightly serrate edges, ovate-lanceolate or ovate elliptic 2.5 to 7.0 inches long. Petioles are usually wingless or with minor wings. The flowers are generally unisexual providing self-pollination, but some male individuals could be found due to pistil abortion. The clustered flowers of the acidic varieties are purplish tinted from outside, but the sweet ones are white-yellowish.
The acidic varieties include the Florentine and Diamante citron from Italy, the Greek citron and the Balady citron from Israel. The sweet varieties include the Corsican and Moroccan citrons. Between the pulpless are also some fingered varieties and the Yemenite citron.
The citron tree is very vigorous with almost no dormancy, blooming several times a year, and is therefore fragile and extremely sensitive to frost.The citrus Industry, The Purdue University

==Origin and distribution==

Despite the variation among the cultivars, authorities agree the citron is an old and original species. There is molecular evidence that all other cultivated citrus species arose by hybridization among four ancestral types, which are the citron, pomelo, mandarin and papeda.
The citron is believed to be the purest of them all, since it is usually fertilized by self-pollination, and is therefore generally considered to be a male parent of any citrus hybrid rather than a female one.[ref]Citrus phylogeny and genetic origin of important species as investigated by molecular markers. 2000
Today, authorities agree that all citrus species are native to Southeast Asia where they are found wild and in an uncultivated form. The story of how they spread to the Mediterranean has been reported by Francesco Calabrese,Calabrese, La favolosa storia degli agrumi. L'EPOS, 1998, Palerno Italy. English translation in Citrus: the genus citrus Henri Chapot,Capot, "The citrus plant", p.6-13. in: Citrus. Ciba-Geigy Agrochemicals Tech. Monogr.4. Ciba-Geigy Ltd., 1975, Basle, Switzerland. Samuel Tolkowsky,Tolkowsky, Hesperides. A history of the culture and use of citrus fruits, p.371. John Bale, Sons and Curnow, 1938, London, England. Elizabetta Nicolisi,Nicolisi, Citrus Genetics, Breeding and Biotechnology and others.[ref]The Citrus Industry
^The Purdue University
^Food in China: a cultural and historical inquiry By Frederick J. Simoons, Google Books
^The Search for the Authentic Citron: Historic and Genetic Analysis; HortScienc 40(7):1963–1968. 2005[/ref]
The citron could also be native to India where it borders on Burma, in valleys at the foot of the Himalayas, and in the Indian Western Ghats.Sir Joseph Hooker. Flora of British India, i. 514)COUNTRY REPORT TO THE FAO INTERNATIONAL TECHNICAL CONFERENCE ON PLANT GENETIC RESOURCES (Leipzig, 1996); Prepared by: Nepal Agricultural Research Council; Kathmandu, June 1995; CHAPTER 2.2 It is thought that by the time of Theophrastus, the citron was mostly cultivated in the Persian Gulf on its way to the Mediterranean basin, where it was cultivated during the later centuries in different areas as described by Erich Isaac.Isaac, "The Citron in the Mediterranean: a study in religious influences", Economic Geography, Vol. 35 No. 1. (Jan. 1959) pp. 71–78 Many mention the role of Alexander the Great and his armies as they attacked Persia and what is today Pakistan, as being responsible for the spread of the citron westward, reaching the European countries such as Macedonia and Italy.[ref]The Pordue University
The citron is  mentioned in the Torah as being required for ritual use during the Feast of Tabernacles (Lev. 23:40). According to this tradition, the Jews brought it back to Israel from their exile in Egypt, where the Egyptologist and archaeologist Victor Loret claimed to have identified it depicted on the walls of the botanical garden at the Karnak Temple, which dates back to the time of Thutmosis III, approximately 3,000 years ago. Journal of the Royal Horticultural Society

==Antiquity and religious texts==

The citron has been cultivated since ancient times, predating the cultivation of other citrus species[tpl]cite needed|date=April 2013[/tpl].

===Theophrastus===

The following is from the writings of TheophrastusHistoria plantarum 4.4.2-3 (exc. Athenaeus Deipnosophistae 3.83.d-f); cf. Vergil Georgics 2.126-135; Pliny Naturalis historia 12.15,16.

===Pliny the Elder===

About 400 years later it was also described by Pliny the Elder, who called it nata Assyria malus. The following is from his book Natural History.

===Islamic Literature===

The citron has also been mentioned widely in Islamic literature and its significance has been attested by Muhammad. It has references in the authentic hadith books known as Sahih Bukhari and Sahih Muslim. 
Imam Bukhari and Imam Muslim both narrate in their Sahih the following:
عن أبى موسى الأشعرى قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم مثل المؤمن الذى يقرأ القرآن مثل الأترجة ريحها طيب وطعمها طيب ومثل المؤمن الذى لا يقرأ القرآن مثل التمرة لا ريح لها وطعمها حلو ومثل المنافق الذى يقرأ القرآن مثل الريحانة ريحها طيب وطعمها مر ومثل المنافق الذى لا يقرأ القرآن كمثل الحنظلة ليس لها ريح وطعمها مر (متفق عليه)
Abu Musa (Radhiyallahu Anhu) narrates that Rasulullah (Sallalahu Alaihi Wasallam) said, “The example of a believer who recites the Qur’an is like that of a citron.  It has a pleasant smell and a sweet taste.  The example of a believer who does not recite the Qur’an is like that of a date.  It has no smell, though its taste is sweet.  The example of a hypocrite who recites the Qur’an is that of a sweet smelling flower.  It has fragrance but has a bitter taste.  The example of a hypocrite who does not read the Qur’an is like a wild gourd.  It has a bitter taste and no smell. (Sahih al-Bukhari & Sahih Muslim)
In another narration it is mentioned:
عن أبي كبشة الأنماري قال كان رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم يعجبه النظر إلى الأترج وكان يعجبه النظر إلى الحمام الأحمر (المعجم الكبير للطبرانى)
Abu Kabasha al-Anmari said, “Rasulullah (Sallalahu Alaihi Wasallam) enjoyed looking at a citron and red pigeons (al-Mu’jam al-Kabir lil al-Tabrani)

==References==

==External links==


