[[Golden-fronted Leafbird]]

CATEGORIES: Chloropsis, Birds of Bangladesh, Birds of Southeast Asia, Birds of India, Birds of Sri Lanka

The Golden-fronted Leafbird (Chloropsis aurifrons) is a species of leafbird. It is a common resident breeder in India, Sri Lanka, and parts of Southeast Asia. It often includes the Sumatran Leafbird (C. media) from Sumatra as a subspecies, but the two differ extensively in, among others, morphology.
Its habitat is forest and scrub. It builds its nest in a tree, laying 2-3 eggs. This species eats insects and berries.
The adult is green-bodied with a black face and throat bordered with yellow. It has an orange forehead and blue moustachial line, but lacks the blue flight feathers and tail sides of Blue-winged Leafbird. Young birds have a plain green head.
The southern Indian race,  C. a. frontalis, has a narrower yellow border to black face. The throat is black and it has a blue sub-moustachial stripe and duller orange forehead. Towards the extreme south of India and Sri Lanka the race insularis occurs which is slightly smaller than frontalis.Rasmussen, P. C. & J. Anderton 2005. Birds of South Asia:The Ripley Guide. Vol 2. Smithsonian Institution and Lynx Edicions

==References==

==Gallery==

Image:Golden-fronted Leafbird (Chloropsis aurifrons) feeding at Jayanti, Duars, West Bengal W Picture 312.jpg|feeding at Jayanti in  Buxa Tiger Reserve in Jalpaiguri district of  West Bengal, India. 
Image:Golden-fronted Leafbird (Chloropsis aurifrons) feeding at Jayanti, Duars, West Bengal W IMG 5240.jpg|feeding at Jayanti in  Buxa Tiger Reserve in Jalpaiguri district of  West Bengal, India. 
Image:Golden-fronted Leafbird (Chloropsis aurifrons) at Jayanti, Duars, West Benga W2 Picture 305.jpg|at Jayanti in Buxa Tiger Reserve in Jalpaiguri district of  West Bengal, India.
Image:Golden-fronted Leafbird (Chloropsis aurifrons) at Jayanti, Duars, West Bengal W Picture 308.jpg| at Jayanti in  Buxa Tiger Reserve in Jalpaiguri district of  West Bengal, India.
Image:Chloropsis aurifrons-20031005.jpg| at Jurong BirdPark, Singapore


