[[Coat of arms of Brazil]]

CATEGORIES: National symbols of Brazil, National coats of arms, Brazilian coats of arms, Southern Cross Flags

The coat of arms of Brazil was created on November 19, 1889, four days after Brazil became a republic.
The coat of arms consists of the central emblem surrounded by coffee (at the left) and tobacco (at the right) branches, which were important crops in Brazil at that time.
In the blue circle in the center, the Southern Cross ([tpl]lang-pt|Cruzeiro do Sul[/tpl]) can be seen. The ring of 27 stars around it represents Brazil's 26 states and the Federal District.
The blue ribbon contains the official name of Brazil (República Federativa do Brasil — Federative Republic of Brazil) in its first line. Prior to 1964, this line contained the previous official name,  Estados Unidos do Brasil — United States of Brazil. In the second line, the date of the federative republic's establishment (November 15, 1889) is written.

==National arms==

The National Arms of the Republic were instituted by Decree No. 4, with alteration made by Law No. 5443 of 28 May 1968 (Annex No. 8) The making of the National Arms should conform to the proportions of 15 units of height by 14 of width and take into account the following provisions:

==Arms of the Empire of Brazil==

The Arms of the Empire of Brazil were used by both Emperors Pedro I and Pedro II until the downfall of the monarchy in 1889. These arms (with modifications) are used by the present imperial house.
On 18 September 1822, eleven days after proclaiming Brazil's independence Royal Prince Dom Pedro signed a decree instituting these arms stating "... henceforth the arms of this Empire of Brazil will be, on a green field, a gold armillary sphere superimposed on a cross of the Order of Christ, the sphere encircled by 19 silver stars on a blue circle; and an imperial crown with diamonds set atop the shield, the sides of which will be embraced by two plants of coffee and tobacco, as emblems of its Empire's riches, in their proper colors and tied at the bottom with the national bow-knot."Vianna, Hélio. História do Brasil: período colonial, monarquia e república. 15. ed. São Paulo: Melhoramentos, 1994, p.417 
On 12 October 1822 when the newly independent country was declared an Empire and Prince Pedro became the country's first emperor, the coat of arms became known as the Imperial Coat of Arms.Vianna, Hélio. História do Brasil: período colonial, monarquia e república. 15. ed. São Paulo: Melhoramentos, 1994, p.417 
The number of stars in the coat of arms reflected the number of provinces in the Brazilian Empire.
The design of the Crown in the coat of arms changed twice. From 18 September to 12 October 1822, the day when Emperor Dom Pedro I was crowned, the design of the Royal Crown of Portugal was used; from that day until 18 July 1841, the design of the Imperial Crown made for the first Brazilian Emperor was used.
On the latter date, when Brazil's second emperor, Pedro II was crowned, using a new richer crown that was manufactured for him, the design of such Crown replaced the image of the older diadem in the coat of arms, and remained in use until the downfall of the Empire. That is the best-known version of the imperial coat of arms of Brazil.

File:Brazil colonial blason.svg|Coat of arms of the Colonial Brazil, (1500–1815)
File:Coat of arms of the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves.svg|Coat of arms of the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and Algarves, (1816–1821)
File:COA Regent Prince of Brazil.svg|Coat of arms of newly independent Brazil until the Coronation of the first Emperor, Pedro I, September 18, 1822 - December 1, 1822
File:CoA Empire of Brazil (1822-1870).svg|Imperial Coat of arms, design of the first reign (note the crimson velvet within the Crown), kept in usage in the early second reign, until the Coronation of Emperor Pedro II (when the design of the Crown was modified, to reflect the shape of the new Crown, and its dark green velvet cap, December 1, 1822 - July 18, 1840
File:Grandes armas do Brasil.png|Imperial Coat of arms, complete version, design of the first reign (1822–1831)
File:Coat of arms of the Empire of Brazil.svg|Imperial Coat of arms, complete version, design of the second reign (1840–1889). A simplified version was also used. The simplified version was equal to the coat of arms of the first reign, except for the dark green colour of the Crown's cap and the Crown's shape. Thus, the simplified version of the coat of arms contained only the shield surmounted by a Crown and surrounded by branches of coffee and tobacco, united by a red ribbon. Only the complete version included the other elements: the Order of the Southern Cross, the Sceptre and Hand of Justice crossed behind the shield, and the cloth of estate surmounted by a second Crown.

==See also==

==External links==

==References==


