[[Mal Young]]

CATEGORIES: 1957 births, Living people, BBC executives, British television producers, Broadcast media people from Liverpool

Mal Young (born 26 January 1957) is a British television producer, script writer and executive producer.

==Background==

His initial career was in the graphic design industry, and it was not until the age of 27 that he began working in television, on the acclaimed Channel 4 soap opera Brookside. 
Working on the show for nearly a decade, he worked his way up to become its producer in the early 1990s, although his tenure was criticised by some for taking the show away from its social realist roots towards a more sensationalist, ratings-chasing format. He achieved all time record ratings for the series and for Channel 4. He also co-created and produced his own successful drama series for Channel 4, And The Beat Goes On. 
He then moved on to become Head of Drama at the independent production company Pearson Television, where he oversaw work on ITV police drama The Bill and another soap opera, Channel 5's Family Affairs, which he created, and was Executive Producer on C5's legal drama series, the BAFTA nominated Wing And A Prayer.

==BBC==

In 1997, he moved to the BBC to become the Controller of Continuing Drama Series for the Corporation's in-house production arm, a position he held until 2004. In this role, he was responsible for overseeing all of the organisation's in-house continuing episodic drama series (as opposed to short-run multi-episode-storyline serials, which are handled by the Head of Serials). Programmes he oversaw for the BBC included the soap opera EastEnders; medical dramas Doctors (which he co-created), Casualty and the latter's spin-off series Holby City, which he created; police dramas Dalziel and Pascoe, Waking the Dead and Merseybeat; anthology shows The Afternoon Play and Murder in Mind; legal drama Judge John Deed; rural-set Down to Earth; comedy-drama Being April and science-fiction series Doctor Who.

==19Television==

At the end of 2004, Young left the staff of the BBC to take up a new,  position as Head of Drama at independent production company 19Television Limited, part of Simon Fuller's 19 Entertainment, Also from the BBC came former Head of Development, Serena Cullen, who is now 19 Entertainment's Head of Development for Film and Television.  They are charged with developing new drama formats for the UK and U.S. markets. he now splits his time between the US and UK. He co-created, wrote and produced a drama pilot for Fox in March 2007, Born In The USA. He then co-wrote and sold another pilot, to The CW in the US - Austin Golden Hour - a real time medical drama series format for the 2008-2009 season.

==Personal==

He is engaged to the singer Mari Wilson, whom he met at a charity function in 2001. In September 1999 he gave the Huw Weldon RTS lecture at their Cambridge Convention. In May 2005, he received a Special Award for his Contribution to Television from ITV's Soap Awards. In July 2004, in a poll of industry experts conducted by Radio Times magazine, he was voted the 9th Most Powerful Person in Television Drama. He was produces of the widley derided Desperate Scousewives.

==External links==


