[[Ethnomethodology]]

CATEGORIES: Sociological paradigms, Sociological theories, Science and technology studies, Sociology index, Methods in sociology

Ethnomethodology is a method for understanding the social orders people use to make sense of the world through analysing their accounts and descriptions of their day-to-day experiences.Karamjit S. Gill (1996). Human machine symbiosis. Springer. Page 330. It is an alternative to the American sociological approach to data analysis born in the 1960s with its theoretical and epistemological importance being that it is a radical breach from traditional sociological modes of thinking.Alain Coulon (1995). Ethnomethodology. London: Sage Publications. Page 1. ISBN 0803947771.Paul Attewell (1974). Ethnomethodology since Garfinkel. Theory and Society, Vol. 1, No. 2 (Summer, 1974), pp. 179-210 The term itself was originally coined by Harold Garfinkel in 1954,Harold Garfinkel (2002). Ethnomethodology's Program. New York: Rowman and Littlefield. ISBN 0742516423. Page 4. but the discipline itself has changed from Garfinkel's original programme to the point where it is no longer recognisable.J.R. Bergmann (2004). Ethmethodology. In: U. Flick, E. von Kardorff & I. Steinke (Eds.) A Companion to Qualitative Research; pp.72-81.
Ethnomethodology is a descriptive discipline and does not engage in the explanation or evaluation of the particular social order undertaken as a topic of study.Wes W. Sharrock, Bob Anderson, R. J. Anderson (1986). The ethnomethodologists. London: Taylor & Francis. ISBN 0853129495. Page 18 As a method, it is used in ethnographic studies to describe people's methods that they use in everyday situations.Randall Collins, Michael Makowsky (1978). The discovery of society. London: Random House. Page 232

==Definition==

The term's etymology can be broken down into its three constituent parts: ethno - method - ology, for the purpose of explanation. Using an appropriate Southern California example: ethno refers to a particular socio-cultural group a particular, localized community of surfers; method refers to the methods and practices this particular group employs in its everyday activities to surfing; and ology refers to the systematic description of these methods and practices. The focus of the investigation used in our example is the social order of surfing, the ethnomethodological interest is in the "how" methods and practices of the production and maintenance of this social order. In essence ethnomethology attempts to create classifications of the social actions of individuals within groups through drawing on the experience of the groups directly, without imposing on the setting the opinions of the researcher with regards to social order, as is the case with sociological studies.Michael Lynch, Scientific Practice and Ordinary Action: Ethnomethodology and Social Studies of Science, Cambridge UP, 1993.

==Example==

Investigating the conduct of jury members, an ethnomethodologist would seek to describe the common sense methods through which members of a jury produce themselves in a jury room as jurors: methods for establishing matters of fact; methods for developing evidence chains; methods for determining the reliability of witness testimony; methods for establishing the hierarchy of speakers in the jury room; methods for determining the guilt or innocence of defendants, etc. (see Garfinkel:1967). Such methods, taken individually, or in combination, depending on the scope of the investigation, would serve to constitute the social order of being a juror for the participants, and researcher(s), in that specific social setting below: "Some leading policies...": "Social Orders". For the ethnomethodologist, participants bring order to social settings - make them orderable - through the sense making activities of their shared methods and practices as witnessably enacted in those settings.
In this way, ethnomethodology points to a broad and multi-faceted area of inquiry. John Heritage writes, “In it’s open-ended reference to study of any kind of sense-making procedure, the term represents a signpost to a domain of uncharted dimensions rather than a staking out of a clearly delineated territory.”Heritage, J. (1984). Garfinkel and ethnomethodology. Cambridge, U.K: Polity Press.  Page 5.

==Origins==

The approach was originally developed by Harold Garfinkel, based on his study of: the principles and practices of financial accounting; traditional sociological theory and methods Durkheim, Weber, and Parsons; traditional sociological concerns Hobbesian "problem of order"; and the phenomenologies of: Aron Gurwitsch, Alfred Schutz, Edmund Husserl, Martin Heidegger, and Maurice Merleau-Ponty Harold Garfinkel, Studies in Ethnomethodology, Malden MA: Polity Press/Blackwell Publishing. 1984. (ISBN 0-7456-0005) (first published in 1967). Page ix. Anne Rawls provides a brief developmental history of Garfinkel.Anne Rawls, "Harold Garfinkel", Blackwell Companion to Major Social Theorists, ed. G. Ritzer. Blackwell: London, 2000.

==Theory and methods==

One of the most perplexing problems for those new to ethnomethodology is the discovery that it lacks both a formally stated theory and a formal methodology. As serious as these problems might appear on the face of it, neither has prevented ethnomethodologists from doing ethnomethodological studies, and generating a substantial literature of "findings".Doug Maynard & Steve Clayman, "The Diversity of Ethnomethodology", ASR, V.17,pp. 385-418. 1991. A survey of various ethnomethodological approaches to the study of social practices. Page 413-418.
John Heritage has noted the, "off-stage role of theory", in ethnomethodological writings, and the concern that there is nowhere in the ethnomethodological corpus a systematic theoretical statement that would serve as a touchstone for ethnomethodological inquiries.John Heritage, Garfinkel and Ethnomethodology, Cambridge:Polity. 1991.(ISBN 0-7456-0060-3). Page 1
Instead, we are given oblique references to Wittgenstein Language Philosophy,Harold Garfinkel, Studies in Ethnomethodology, Malden MA: Polity Press/Blackwell Publishing. 1984. (ISBN 0-7456-0005) (first published in 1967) Husserl Phenomenology, Gurwitsch Theory, and, most frequently, the works of the social phenomeonologist Alfred Schutz of the Natural Attitude, among others. A multiplicity of theoretical references by Anne Rawls along with the work of Emile Durkheim suggests Durkheim's aphorism regarding the achieved character of social facts.
The authors and theoretical references cited in Garfinkel's work do not themselves serve as a rigorous theoretical basis for ethnomethodology, in whole or in part. Ethnomethodology is not Durkheimian, although it shares some of the interests of Durkheim; it is not phenomenology, although it borrows from Husserl and Schutz's studies of the Lifeworld Lebenswelt; it is not a form of Gestalt theory, although it describes social orders as having Gestalt-like properties; and, it is not Wittgensteinian, although it makes use of Wittgenstein's understanding of rule-use, etc. Instead, these borrowings are only fragmentary references to theoretical works from which ethnomethodology has appropriated theoretical ideas for the expressed purposes of doing ethnomethodological investigations.
In terms of the question of ethnomethodological methods, it is the position of Anne Rawls, speaking for Garfinkel, that ethnomethodology is itself not a method. That is, it does not have a set of formal reseach methods or procedures. Instead, the position taken is that ethnomethodologists have conducted their studies in a variety of ways, and that the point of these investigations is,  ' ...to discover the things that persons in particular situations do, the methods they use, to create the patterned orderliness of social life.' 
Ethnomethodology is not a methodology, but rather a study of methodology, because it not have a formal methodology, but is the study of, "member's methods", the methods of others. Michael Lynch has also noted that: "Leading figures in the field have repeatedly emphasised that there is no obligatory set of methods by ethnomethodologists, and no prohibition against using any research procedure whatsoever, if it is adequate to the particular phenomena under study." Michael Lynch, The Social Science Encyclopedia, Routledge, 2nd Ed., 1989. (Wieder/Garfinkel:1992:175-206).
Again, as perplexing as this position might seem to a traditional social scientist, such a proposition is consistent with ethnomethodology's understanding of "member's methods", and has philosophical standing when looked at in terms of certain lines of philosophical thought regarding the philosophy of science (Polyani:1974; Kuhn:1996; Feyerabend:1975/2010), and the study of the actual practices of scientific procedure.

==Some leading policies, methods and definitions==

==Differences between sociology and ethnomethodology==

Since ethnomethodology has become anathema to certain moral sociologists, and since those practicing it like to perceive their own efforts as constituting a radical break from prior sociologies, there has been little attempt to link ethnomethodology to these prior sociologies. However, whilst ethnomethodology is distinct from sociological methods, it does not seek to compete with it, or provide remedies for any of its practices.Harold Garfinkel, Studies in Ethnomethodology, Malden MA: Polity Press/Blackwell Publishing. 1984. (ISBN 0-7456-0005) (first published in 1967). Page: viii The Ethnomethodological approach differs as much from the sociological approach as sociology does from psychology even though both speak of social action.Hugh Mehan & Houston Wood, The reality of ethnomethodology. 1975. Chichester: Wiley. ISBN 0471590606. Page 5. This does not mean that ethnomethodology does not use traditional sociological forms as a sounding board for its own programmatic development, or  to establish benchmarks for the differences between traditional sociological forms of study and ethnomethodology as it only means that ethnomethodology was not established in order to: repair, criticize, undermine, or 'poke fun' at traditional sociological forms [tpl]Citation needed|date=April 2009[/tpl]. In essence the distinctive difference between sociological approaches and ethnolomethodology is that the latter adopts a commonsense attitude towards knowledge Kenneth Leiter, A primer of ethnomethodology. 1980. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195026284 . Page 14.
In contrast to traditional sociological forms of inquiry, it is a hallmark of the Ethnomethodological perspective that it does not make theoretical or methodological appeals to: outside assumptions regarding the structure of an actor or actors' characterisation of social reality; refer to the subjective states of an individual or groups of individuals; attribute conceptual projections such as, "value states", "sentiments", "goal orientations", "mini-max economic theories of behavior", etc., to any actor or group of actors; or posit a specific "normative order" as a transcendental feature of social scenes, etc.
For the Ethnomethodologist, the methodic realisation of social scenes takes place within the actual setting under scrutiny, and is structured by the participants in that setting through the reflexive accounting of that setting's features. The job of the Ethnomethodologist is to describe the methodic character of these activities, not account for them in a way that transcends that which is made available in and through the actual accounting practices of the individual's party to those settings.
The differences can therefore be summed up as follows:

==Links between Ethnomethodology and Phenomenology==

Even though ethnomethodology has been characterised as having a "phenomenological sensibility", and reliable commentators have acknowledged that, "there is a strong influence of phenomenology on ethnomethodology..." (Maynard/Kardash:sociologyencyclopedia.com:1484),  orthodox adherents to the discipline - those who follow the teachings of Garfinkel - know better than to represent it as a branch, or form, of phenomenology, or phenomenological sociology.
The confusion between the two disciplines stems, in part, from the practices of some ethnomethodologists Garfinkel, who sift through phenomenological texts, recovering phenomenological concepts and findings relevant to their interests, and then transpose these concepts and findings to topics in the study of social order. Such interpretive transpositions do not make the ethnomethodologist a phenomenologist, or ethnomethodology a form of phenomenology.
To further muddy the waters, some phenomenological sociologists seize upon ethnomethodological findings as examples of applied phenomenology; this even when the results of these ethnomethodological investigations clearly do not make use of phenomenological methods, or formulate their findings in the language of phenomenology. So called phenomenological analyses of social structures that do not have prima facie reference to any of the structures of intentional consciousness should raise questions as to the phenomenological status of such analyses.
Garfinkel speaks of phenomenological texts and findings as being, "appropriated", and intentionally, "misread", for the purposes of exploring topics in the study of social order. These appropriations and methodical "misreadings" of phenomenological texts and findings are clearly made for the purposes of furthering ethnomethodological analyses, and should not be mistaken for logical extensions of these phenomenological texts and findings.
Lastly, there is no claim in any of Garfinkel's work that ethnomethodology is a form of phenomenology, or phenomenological sociology. To state that ethnomethodology has a, "phenomenological sensibility", or that, "there is a strong influence of phenomenology on ethnomethodology", is not the equivalent of describing ethnomethodology as a form of phenomenology (see Garfinkel/Liberman:2007:3-7).
This having been said, one should also note that even though ethnomethodology is not a form of phenomenology,  the reading and understanding of phenomenological texts, and developing the capability of seeing phenomenologically is essential to the actual doing of ethnomethodological studies. As Garfinkel states in regard to the work of the phenomenologist Aron Gurwitsch, especially his, "Field of Consciousness" (1964/2010: ethnomethodology's phenomenological urtext): "you can't do anything unless you do read his texts."

==Conversation analysis==

The relationship between ethnomethodology (EM) and conversation analysis (CA) has always been somewhat contentious in terms of boundaries. The clearest single statement appearing in the literature, from an orthodox EM perspective.
Unpacking Rawls' statement, we can note two essential distinctions:
In general, we can say the following: 1 Both EM and CA are independent forms of investigation; 2 There is no necessary connection between EM and CA studies in terms of principles or methods; 3 EM and CA studies may overlap in terms of interests and projects; 4 CA studies must adhere to the foundational tenants of EM studies in order to be considered properly ethnomethodological; 5 EM studies may utilise CA methods, as anecdotal descriptions, as substantive findings (when in conformity with foundational EM principles), or as supplemental findings germane to the in situ findings of a particular EM study; and, 6 Both disciplines can function very well without the other, but in as much as their interests coincide in any given instance, both can profit from the understanding of the others investigational methods and  findings.

==Varieties==

According to George Psathas, five types of ethnomethodological study can be identified (Psathas:1995:139-155). These may be characterised as:
Further discussion of the varieties and diversity of ethnomethodological investigations can be found in Maynard & Clayman.
Article is available online.
Reference Work: "Garfinkel", Sage "Masters" series (2003:4Vols:approx.1500 pages). Compendium of theoretical papers, ethnomethodological studies, and discussions, edited by M.Lynch & W. Sharrock. Table of contents is available on the publisher's website.
Reference Work: "Ethnomethodology", Sage "Research" series (2011:4Vols:approx. 1500 pages). Compendium of theoretical papers, ethnomethodological studies, and discussions, edited by M.Lynch & W. Sharrock. Table of contents is available on the publisher's website.

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==


