[[George Edmund Badger]]

CATEGORIES: 1795 births, 1866 deaths, Members of the North Carolina House of Representatives, North Carolina lawyers, North Carolina state court judges, North Carolina Whigs, People from New Bern, North Carolina, United States Secretaries of the Navy, United States Senators from North Carolina, Unsuccessful nominees to the United States Supreme Court, Whig Party United States Senators, Yale University alumni, Tyler administration cabinet members, William Henry Harrison administration cabinet members

George Edmund Badger (April 17, 1795[tpl]spaced ndash[/tpl]May 11, 1866) was a Whig U.S. senator from the state of North Carolina.
Badger was born on April 17, 1795 in New Bern, North Carolina. Following a partial college education at Yale University, he studied law and was admitted to the bar in 1814. Badger practiced law in North Carolina, was active in state politics, and served as a state superior court judge. A supporter of Andrew Jackson from the 1820s, he separated with him in the mid-1830s, became a leader of the Whig party and helped carry the Whigs to victory in the 1840 Presidential election.
Upon taking office, President William Henry Harrison appointed Badger as his Secretary of the Navy, and he continued in that post when John Tyler succeeded to the Presidency upon Harrison's death. Badger's brief term as Secretary was marked by efforts to strengthen the Navy in the face of tension with Great Britain, the establishment of the Home Squadron and continued interest in steamships.
Badger resigned in September 1841, during a general cabinet shakeup. He was elected to the Senate in 1846 to fill the unexpired term of William Henry Haywood, Jr. and remained a Senator until 1855. He was nominated by President Millard Fillmore as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court in 1853, but was not confirmed by the Senate. John Archibald Campbell instead got the position. He was a Unionist during the secession crisis but thereafter supported the Confederate war effort. Badger died in Raleigh, North Carolina on May 11, 1866.
Two Navy ships have been named in honor of Senator Badger: USS George E. Badger (DD-196), and USS Badger (FF-1071).  A Liberty ship, the SS George E. Badger, also was named in his honor. Badger was a cousin of naval officers Oscar C. Badger, Charles J. Badger and Oscar C. Badger II.

==References==

==External links==


