[[Synoptic scale meteorology]]

CATEGORIES: Weather, Storm

The synoptic scale in meteorology (also known as large scale or cyclonic scale) is a horizontal length scale of the order of 1000 kilometres (about 620 miles) or more.American Meteorological Society. Cyclonic scale. Retrieved on 10 May 2007. This corresponds to a horizontal scale typical of mid-latitude depressions (e.g. extratropical cyclones).  Most high and low-pressure areas seen on weather maps such as surface weather analyses are synoptic-scale systems, driven by the location of Rossby waves in their respective hemisphere.  Low-pressure areas and their related frontal zones occur on the leading edge of a trough within the Rossby wave pattern, while surface highs form on the back edge of the trough.  Most precipitation areas occur near frontal zones.  The word synoptic is derived from the Greek word [tpl]lang|grc|συνοπτικός[/tpl] ([tpl]transl|grc|synoptikos[/tpl]), meaning seen together.
The Navier–Stokes equations applied to atmospheric motion can be simplified by scale analysis in the synoptic scale. It can be shown that the main terms in horizontal equations are Coriolis force and pressure gradient terms; therefore, one can use geostrophic approximation.  In vertical coordinates, the momentum equation simplifies to the hydrostatic equilibrium equation.

==Surface weather analysis==

A surface weather analysis is a special type of weather map that provides a view of weather elements over a geographical area at a specified time based on information from ground-based weather stations.Air Apparent: How Meteorologists Learned to Map, Predict, and Dramatize Weather.  University of Chicago PressChicago: 1999.  Weather maps are created by plotting or tracing the values of relevant quantities such as sea level pressure, temperature, and cloud cover onto a geographical map to help find synoptic scale features such as weather fronts.
The first weather maps in the 19th century were drawn well after the fact to help devise a theory on storm systems.Eric R. Miller. American Pioneers in Meteorology. Retrieved on 2007-04-18.  After the advent of the telegraph, simultaneous surface weather observations became possible for the first time, and beginning in the late 1840s, the Smithsonian Institution became the first organization to draw real-time surface analyses.  Use of surface analyses began first in the United States, spreading worldwide during the 1870s.  Use of the Norwegian cyclone model for frontal analysis began in the late 1910s across Europe, with its use finally spreading to the United States during World War II.
Surface weather analyses have special symbols which show frontal systems, cloud cover, precipitation, or other important information.  For example, an H represents high pressure, implying good and fair weather.  An L represents low pressure, which frequently accompanies precipitation.  Various symbols are used not just for frontal zones and other surface boundaries on weather maps, but also to depict the present weather at various locations on the weather map.  Areas of precipitation help determine the frontal type and location.  Mesoscale systems and boundaries such as tropical cyclones, outflow boundaries and squall lines also are analyzed on surface weather analyses.  Isobars are commonly used to place surface boundaries from the horse latitudes poleward, while streamline analyses are used in the tropics.Bureau of Meteorology. The Weather Map. Retrieved on 10 May 2007.

==Extratropical cyclone==

An extratropical cyclone is a synoptic scale low pressure weather system that has neither tropical nor polar characteristics, being connected with fronts and horizontal gradients in temperature and dew point otherwise known as "baroclinic zones".[ref]
</ref>
The descriptor "extratropical" refers to the fact that this type of cyclone generally occurs outside of the tropics, in the middle latitudes of the planet. These systems may also be described as "mid-latitude cyclones" due to their area of formation, or "post-tropical cyclones" where extratropical transition has occurred,ExtraLessonMillUni[ref]
