[[Manual transmission]]

CATEGORIES: Automotive transmission technologies, Automobile transmissions

A manual transmission, also known as a manual gearbox, stick shift (for vehicles with hand-lever shifters), standard transmission, or simply a manual, is type of transmission used in motor vehicle applications.  It uses a driver-operated clutch engaged and disengaged by a foot pedal (automobile) or hand lever (motorcycle), for regulating torque transfer from the engine to the transmission; and a gear stick operated by foot (motorcycle) or by hand (automobile).
A conventional, 5 or 6-speed manual transmission is often the standard equipment in a base-model car; other options include automated transmissions such as an automatic transmission (often a manumatic), a semi-automatic transmission, or a continuously variable transmission (CVT).

==Overview==

Manual transmissions often feature a driver-operated clutch and a movable gear stick. Most automobile manual transmissions allow the driver to select any forward gear ratio ("gear") at any time, but some, such as those commonly mounted on motorcycles and some types of racing cars, only allow the driver to select the next-higher or next-lower gear. This type of transmission is sometimes called a sequential manual transmission.
The way a manual transmission works is that the flywheel is attached to the engine, the clutch disk is in between the pressure plate and the flywheel. When running, the clutch disk spins with the flywheel. As the clutch pedal is depressed, the throw out bearing is pushed in, which makes the pressure plate stop applying pressure to the clutch disk. This makes it stop receiving power from the engine so that the gear can be shifted without damaging the transmission. When the clutch pedal is released, the clutch disk is allowed to start receiving power from the engine.
Manual transmissions are characterized by gear ratios that are selectable by locking selected gear pairs to the output shaft inside the transmission. Conversely, most automatic transmissions feature epicyclic (planetary) gearing controlled by brake bands and/or clutch packs to select gear ratio. Automatic transmissions that allow the driver to manually select the current gear are called Manumatics. A manual-style transmission operated by computer is often called an automated transmission rather than an automatic.
Contemporary automobile manual transmissions typically use four to six forward gears and one reverse gear, although automobile manual transmissions have been built with as few as two and as many as eight gears. Transmission for heavy trucks and other heavy equipment usually have at least 9 gears so the transmission can offer both a wide range of gears and close gear ratios to keep the engine running in the power band.  Some heavy vehicle transmissions have dozens of gears, but many are duplicates, introduced as an accident of combining gear sets, or introduced to simplify shifting.  Some manuals are referred to by the number of forward gears they offer (e.g., 5-speed) as a way of distinguishing between automatic or other available manual transmissions. Similarly, a 5-speed automatic transmission is referred to as a "5-speed automatic."

==Unsynchronized transmission==

