[[Sathya Sai Organization]]

CATEGORIES: Sathya Sai Baba, Hindu-affiliated organizations, Religious organisations based in India

The Sathya Sai Organization (or Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organization) was founded in the 1960s by Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba.SSSCT- Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organisation The first Sai Centers were started in India under the name Sri Sathya Sai Seva Samithi.Sai Baba Of India-Sri Sathya Sai Baba Centers- Sai Baba organisation worldwide  The Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organization originated "to enable its members to undertake service activities as a means to spiritual advancement." According to the Sathya Sai Organization, there are an estimated 1,200 Sathya Sai Baba Centers in 130 countries worldwide.Sathya Sai Org: Numbers to Sai Centers and Names of Countries Its current chairperson is Michael Goldstein.Intl Sai Org sites

==Mission statement==

"The main objective of the Sathya Sai Organization," as Sathya Sai Baba states, "is to help man recognize the divinity that is inherent in him. So, your duty is to emphasize the One, to experience the One in all you do or speak. Do not give any importance to differences of religion or sect or status or color. Have the feeling of one-ness permeate every act of yours. Only those who do so have a place in this Organization; the rest can withdraw."Sathya Sai Baba Sathya Sai Speaks IX, 35, 187–188 (old edition)Sathya Sai Baba Avatar Sweden Sverige
The principal objectives of Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organisation are:
1. To help the individual   
2. To ensure that all human relations are governed by the principles of Sathya (Truth), Dharma (Right Conduct), Shanthi (Peace), Prema (Love) and Ahimsa (Non-violence).
3. To make devotees more sincere and dedicated in the practice of their respective religions by understanding properly the true spirit of their religion.
Sathya Sai Baba further explains the quality of service expected of the organization. "The Organisations named after Me are not to be used for publicising My Name, or creating a new cult around My worship. They must try to spread interest in japam (recitation of God's Name), dhyaanam (meditation) and other sadhanas (spiritual practices), which lead man Godward; they must demonstrate the joy derivable from bhajan (devotional group singing) and Naamasmarana (remembering God's Name), the Shanthi (peace) that one can draw from Sathsang (good company).
They must render seva (service) to the helpless, the sick, the distressed, the illiterate and the needy. Their seva should not be exhibitionistic; it must seek no reward, not even gratitude or thanks from the recipients. Seva is sadhana (spiritual exercise), not a pastime of the rich and well placed. Each one must realize this truth."http://www.sssbpt.info/ssspeaks/volume08/sss08-06.pdf

==Projects==

The International Sai Organization hosts a number of various institutes, trusts and associations.International Sai Organization They include:
Sri Sathya Sai Central TrustSri Sathya Sai Central Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam
Sri Sathya Sai Sadhana Trust -Publications Division- Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publication Trust
Radio SaiRadio Sai Global Harmony
Educational Institutions
Sri Sathya Sai Medical TrustSai Medical Institutions
Ashrams 
Service, Devotion and Education WingsSai Org Service Wing
 
Drinking Water Supply ProjectsDrinking Water Supply Project

==Activities of the Organization==

==Code of Conduct==

The charter of the organization says that every member should undertake sadhana (spiritual discipline) as an integral part of daily life and abide by the following nine codes of conduct http://www.sathyasai.org/devotion/ninepoint.html:

==Organizational structure==

The International Sai Organisation is ordered into 9 zones. A number of regions are then created in each zone. For example, both the US and Canada are in zone 1, however the United States is in region 11 while Canada is in region 13. Each region then branches out to individual centers 
The center structure operates with the Service, Youth, Education, Ladies and Spiritual coordinators addressing the center President directly, who in turn reports to the Regional coordinator. 
(The regional coordinator acts a liaison between the centers' Presidents and the regional council)
The President of each center has with him/her a secretary, vice president and treasurer.Sri Sathya Sai Baba Organization in Canada - Organizational Structure 
The regional organizational structure (using region 13 as an example) consists of regional coordinators (from various geographic parts of the region) reporting to a Council Chairperson. Independent of the regional coordinators, the Service, Youth, Publications, Education and Spiritual coordinators report directly to the Council Chairperson. The Council Chairperson then communicates with the Central Coordinator of that region.

==References==

==External links==


