[[Harvey Pittel]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, 1943 births, American saxophonists, University of Texas at Austin faculty, University of Southern California alumni, Northwestern University alumni

Harvey Pittel (born June 22, 1943) is an American saxophonist who performs principally in North America, and is currently the Professor of Saxophone at the University of Texas at Austin Sarah and Ernest Butler School of Music in  the College of Fine Arts.UT Austin, College of Fine Arts: Harvery Pittel Retrieved 17 October 2010
Following studies as a music education major at the University of Southern California (USC), Pittel obtained his master's degree under the tutelage of Fred Hemke at Northwestern University and subsequently studied at the Juilliard School with Joseph Allard. He performed a solo recital at Carnegie Hall in 1973 as a winner of the Concert Artists Guild competition. He has edited the saxophone and piano reduction of the Ingolf Dahl Concerto for Saxophone and Band based on his work with Dahl during his studies at the University of Southern California.  His version of the Concerto is the standard version of this piece played today, and has performed the piece under Dahl, as well as Michael Tilson Thomas and Zubin Mehta. Mr. Pittel has performed with many major orchestras including the Los Angeles Philharmonic, Louisville Orchestra, Boston Symphony, New York Philharmonic, San Antonio Symphony, and Austin Symphony.
Pittel has been critically acclaimed in leading newspapers and magazines by both Harold C. Schonberg and Raymond Ericson in The New York Times,Dornpub: HarveyPittel'sCompleteBiography&Discography Retrieved 17 October 2010 Michael Steinberg in the Boston Globe, and  Winthrop Sargeant in The New Yorker, and his many  awards include two Martha Baird Rockefeller Fund grants, and a National Endowment for the Arts Solo Recitalist grant.
Film soundtracks on  which  Pittel  has collaborated include for Woody Allen's  Manhattan, and he has appeared as a guest on The Today Show and  Live From Lincoln Center. Works written for Harvey Pittel include the Paul Chihara Saxophone Concerto, Soprano Saxophone Sonata, and  Milton Babbitt's Images for Saxophone and Tape.
Former students include:
Dr Jeffrey Benedict (faculty, Department of Music, California State University, Los Angeles),California State University, Los Angeles Retrieved 5 May 2012
Dr Dan Goble (Dean, School of Visual and Performing Arts, Western Connecticut State University; also plays with the Harvey Pittel Saxophone Quartet),Western Connecticut  State University Retrieved 17 October 2010 
Todd Oxford (faculty, School of Music, Texas State University, San Marcos)Texas State University, San Marcos. School  of Music Retrieved 17 October 2010
Steve Mohacey, Dr. Jack Cooper (faculty, University of Memphis, School of Music), 
Vincent Gnojek (faculty, School of Music, University of Kansas),University  of Kansas, School  of Music Retrieved 17 October 2010
Roger Greenberg (Retired from University of Northern Colorado),
James Rotter (Retired, Cal State Fullerton, USC Thornton School of Music),
Robert Medina (Elision Saxophone Quartet),
Todd Yukomoto University of Hawaii,
Javier Oviedo (faculty, Western Connecticut State University),
Paul Haar (University of Nebraska-Lincoln), Rami El-Farrah (Faculty, School of Music, University of Texas at San Antonio)
Mace Hibbard (Georgia State University),
Jeremy Justeson (Kutztown University of Pennsylvania),  
Allen Won (faculty, The Mannes College for Music),The New School, The Mannes College for Music Retrieved 17 October 2010
William Graves,
James Hairston,
Debra McKim (Hastings College). Branford Marsalis and Kenny Garrett are among  the most notable jazz saxophonists that have studied with Pittel.

==Discography (selection)==

==References==

==External links==


