[[Tallaght]]

CATEGORIES: Tallaght, County towns in the Republic of Ireland, Towns and villages in South Dublin (county)

Tallaght ([tpl]IPAc-en|ˈ|t|æ|l|ə[/tpl] [tpl]respell|TAL|ə[/tpl]; [tpl]lang-ga|Tamhlacht[/tpl], [tpl]IPA-ga|ˈt̪ˠəul̪ˠəxt̪ˠ|IPA[/tpl]) is the largest town, and county seat, of South Dublin, Ireland. The village area, dating from at least the 17th century, held one of the earliest settlements known in the southern part of the island, and one of medieval Ireland's more important monastic centres.History and Antiquities of Tallaght in the County of Dublin, 2nd edition, 1889; Handcock, William Domville
Up to the 1960s Tallaght was little more than a small village in County Dublin, linked to several nearby rural areas which were part of the large civil parish of the same name - the local council estimates the then population at 2,500.Tallaght, Dublin, Ireland: County Development Plan 2004-2010, p. 78 Suburban development began in the 1970s and a town centre area has been developing since the late 1980s. There is no legal definition of the boundaries of Tallaght, but the electoral divisions known as "Tallaght" followed by the name of a locality have, according to the 2011 census, a population of 71,504. There are currently calls for Tallaght to be declared a city.http://www.tallaghtcity.ie/
The village core of the district is located north of, and near to, the River Dodder, and parts of the broader area within South Dublin are close to the borders of Dublin City, Kildare, Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown and County Wicklow. Several streams flow in the area, notably the Jobstown or Tallaght Stream (a tributary of the Dodder River), and the Fettercairn Stream (a tributary of the River Camac), while the Tymon River, the main component of the River Poddle (Liffey tributary), rises in Cookstown, near Fettercairn.

==Etymology==

The place name Tallaght is derived from the words támh leacht, which is Middle Irish for 'plague pit', being made up of the Gaelic words "tamh", meaning plague and "leacht", meaning grave. The words, “Tamhlacht Muintir Partholón” suggest a mass grave, and the earliest mention of a Tallaght is in Lebor Gabála Érenn (the Book Of Invasions), where such a place is said to be the burial place of thousands of Partholonians who died from a plague very much like the Black Death (Parthalo(i)n the Greek was said to be one of the early invaders of Ireland).  Thus the place came to be named Taimhleacht Muintere Parthalain. However, the burials that have been found in the Tallaght area are all normal pre-historic interments, mainly from the Bronze Age, and nothing suggesting a mass grave has so far been recorded here.
The name in Irish, Tamhlacht, is also found at other places, such as Tamlaght in Magherafelt District, Northern Ireland,Tamlaght, County Londonderry though the mention of Eadoir, probably Binn Éadair (Howth) in the passage below, suggests that Tallaght is the more likely location for this tale:
"M2820.1
Naoi mile do ecc fri h-aoin-sechtmain do muinter Parthaloin for Shenmhaigh Ealta Eadoir .i. cúig míle d'feroibh, & ceithre míle do mnáibh. Conadh de sin ata Taimhleacht Muintere Parthalain. Trí ced bliadhain ro caithsiot i n-Erinn."http://www.ucc.ie/celt/online/G100005A.html
Approximates to:
"Nine thousand of them died there, the people of Parthaloin, within weeks on the plain of the flocks near Eadoir. I. Five thousand men, & four thousand women. So swollen was Taimhleacht a Muintere Parthalain. Three hundred died too elsewhere that year in Erinn."
Upon Mount Seskin (the tallest of the Tallaght Hills) can be seen numerous stone structures.  The one that lies atop this mountain is commonly referred to as "The Hell Fire Club" and was built by a man called Speaker Conolly.  It was built upon a passage tomb; this one known locally as a "fairy ring"; an ancient monument similar to Newgrange. Thus was created the perfect location for very many myths and legends, as the destruction of these structures, for any reason, is said to bring bad luck. Today all across the countryside of Ireland can be found random mounds of earth.  Such "fairy rings" are avoided by farmers, as they would rather leave them than risk the wrath of the "good people", the "Sidhe".
Places near Tallaght also featured in the ancient legends of the Fianna, a band of warriors that roamed the country and fought for the High King at Tara. In Lady Gregory's 'Gods and Fighting Men', mention is made of, in particular, Gleann na Smól: in Chapter 12 "The Red Woman" - on a misty morning, Fionn says to his Fians, "Make yourselves ready, and we will go hunting to Gleann-na-Smol."http://www.freefictionbooks.org/books/g/5384-gods-and-fighting-men-by-lady-gregory?start=154 There they meet Niamh of the Golden Hair, who chose Oisín from among all the Fianna to be her husband, told him to come with her on her fairy horse, after which they rode over the land to the sea and across the waves to the land of Tír na nÓg.

===Historical names of the area (by source)===

 Taimhleacht Muintire Parthaloin (ar Sean Mhagh Ealta Edair) – AM2820?,

==History==

===Prehistory===

The documented history of Tallaght dates back to early Christendom in Ireland but the many archaeological sites in the area suggest the presence of Bronze Age and perhaps even earlier settlers in the area.

===8th to 12th centuries===

With the foundation of the monastery of Tallaght by St. Maelruain in 769 A.D. we have a more reliable record of the area's early history. The monastery was a centre of learning and piety, particularly associated with the Céli Dé spiritual reform movement. It was such an important institution that it and the monastery at Finglas were known as the "two eyes of Ireland".Feastdays of the Saints, 2006; Ó Riain,Pádraig St. Aengus, an Ulsterman, was one of the most illustrious of the Céli Dé and devoted himself to the religious life. Wherever he went he was accompanied by a band of followers who distracted him from his devotions. He secretly travelled to the monastery at Tallaght where he was not known and enrolled as a lay brother. He remained unknown for many years until his identity was discovered by Maeilruain. They may have written the Martyrology of Tallaght together, and St Aengus also wrote a calendar of saints known as the Féilire of Aengus.
St. Maelruain died in 792 and was buried in Tallaght. The influence of the monastery continued after his death, as can be judged by the fact that, in 806, the monks of Tallaght were able to prevent the holding of the Tailteann Games, because of some infringement of their rights.
In 811 the monastery was devastated by the Vikings but the destruction was not permanent and the annals of the monastery continued to be recorded for several following centuries. After the Anglo-Norman invasion in 1179, Tallaght and its appurtenances were confirmed to the Diocese of Dublin and became the property of the Archbishop. The complete disappearance of every trace of what must have been an extensive and well organised monastic settlement can only be accounted for by the subsequent history of the place, the erection and demolition of defensive walls and castles, and the incessant warfare and destruction that lasted for hundreds of years.

===13th to 19th centuries===

Throughout the greater part of the 13th century a state of comparative peace existed at Tallaght, but subsequently the O'Byrnes and O'Tooles, in what would become County Wicklow, took offensive action and were joined by many of the Archbishop's tenants. As a result of this the land was not tilled, the pastures were not stocked and the holdings were deserted. In 1310 the bailiffs of Tallaght got a royal grant to enclose the town. No trace of these defensive walls survive and there is no evidence of their exact location, except, perhaps, for the name of the Watergate Bridge which spans the Dodder on the Oldbawn Road.
The continuation of such raids prompted the construction, in 1324, of Tallaght Castle, and it was finished some time before 1349. Tallaght had become an important defensive site on the edge of the Pale. A century later it was reported to be in need of repair.
The 17th and 18th centuries brought many changes to Tallaght. Many mills were built along the Dodder and this brought new prosperity to the broad area, which saw the building of many houses.
When Archbishop Hoadley replaced Archbishop King in 1729 he found the castle in ruins, and had it demolished, building himself a palace at a cost of £2,500. By 1821 the palace too had fallen into ruin and an Act of Parliament was passed which stated that it was unfit for habitation. The following year it was sold to Major Palmer, Inspector General of Prisons, who pulled the palace down and used the materials to build his mansion, Tallaght House, as well as a schoolhouse and several cottages. Tallaght House is now incorporated in the buildings at St. Mary's Priory.
An ancient tower was spared in the demolition of the palace and was later incorporated into the buildings of St. Mary's Priory, where it still stands today. It contains a spiral staircase and was originally four storeys high but is now reduced internally to two. Attached to the castle was a long building which was used in the archbishop's time as a brewery and later as a granary and stables. Under the Dominicans it was converted into a chapel and was used as such until 1883 when the new church was built. The grounds of the Priory, the old palace gardens, still retain many features from the historic past such as the Archbishop's bathhouse, the Friar's Walk and "St. Maelruain's Tree".
The old constabulary barracks on the main street was the scene of the engagement known as the Battle of Tallaght, which occurred during the Fenian rising on 5 March 1867. On that night the Fenians moved out to assemble at the appointed place on Tallaght Hill. The large number of armed men alarmed the police in Tallaght who sent warning to the nearest barracks. There were fourteen constables and a head constable under Sub-inspector Burke at Tallaght, and they took up a position outside the barracks where they commanded the roads from both Greenhills and Templeogue. The first body of armed men came from Greenhills and, when they came under police fire, retreated. Next a party came from Templeogue, and were also dispersed. In 1936 a skeleton, sword-bayonet and water bottle were found in a hollow tree stump near Terenure. It is thought that these were the remains of one of the Fenians who had taken refuge there after the Battle of Tallaght and either died of his wounds or was frozen to death.
In 1888 the Dublin & Blessington Steam Tramway opened and it passed through Tallaght Village. This provided a new means of transporting goods and also brought day-trippers from the city.

===Modern development===

While no plan was formally adopted, Tallaght was laid out as a new town, as set out in the 1967 Myles Wright masterplan for Greater Dublin (this proposed four self-contained "new towns" - at Tallaght, Clondalkin, Lucan and Blanchardstown - all of which were at that time villages surrounded by extensive open lands, with some small settlements). Many of the social and cultural proposals in this plan were ignored by the Dublin local authorities, and contrary to planners' suggestions, Tallaght and the other "new towns" were not provided with adequate facilities. Characterised by the same problems associated with poorly planned fringe areas of many European cities, during the 1970s and 1980s Tallaght became synonymous with suburban mismanagement.
While it was absorbed into the larger suburban area of Dublin (including becoming the postal district Dublin 24 in the 1980s), Tallaght has developed a distinctive identity, arising largely from its rapid growth during recent decades, and now has a thriving local arts, cultural, sports, and economic outlook.
Tallaght's Civic Square contains the seat of the local authority, County Hall, a newly renovated and well-equipped library facility, a theatre building and a "cutting edge" 4-storey arts centre named RUA RED (which opened on 5 February 2009). Along with other local libraries and arts groups, it also has another theatre building, and a homegrown youth theatre company. It is also the home to the Tallaght Swim Team, Tallaght Rugby Club,  the National Basketball Arena, Shamrock Rovers F.C., and several notable martial arts schools and Gaelic Athletic Association clubs.
In October 2008 "An Bratach Fulaingt",http://www.crwflags.com/fotw/flags/ie-sdub.html or "The Endurance Flag" was designed for Tallaght during The D'No Project, run by Tallaght Youth Theatre in partnership with Tallaght Community Arts, and funded by Léargas - and was intended to be flown at the new county arts centre, Rua Red, on April 17 and 18th 2009. However, the flag was ultimately not flown and instead its colours were utilised within aspects of the performance.http://flagspot.net/flags/ie-sdub.html

===Chronology===

==Geography==

===Location===

Tallaght is centred 13 km southwest of Dublin city, in the foothills of the Wicklow Mountains. While there is no formal definition as such, it can be described as beginning southwest of Templeogue, running west towards Saggart, towards Bohernabreena and Glenasmole in the south, Firhouse to the southeast, Knocklyon to the east, and to the southern edges of Clondalkin in the northwest and Walkinstown in the northeast.  It lies outside the M50 Dublin orbital motorway, and in effect forms an irregular circle either side of the N81 Dublin-Blessington road.
The rural villages of Saggart and of Rathcoole lie west of Tallaght, along with the air force aerodrome at Baldonnell. There is also still considerable open land, some still farmed, in this direction.

===Transport===

Tallaght is connected to Dublin city by Dublin Bus services, and by the Red Line of the Luas light rail system, which opened in September 2004. Though the first stop (Tallaght Cross) of the Red Line is called 'Tallaght', the entire 'Red 4' zone (with the exception of the terminus at Saggart) lies within the broader Tallaght area. The current price (2013) for a single ticket From Red 4 to Central 1 is €2.70.
Tallaght is not well connected to Dublin's other towns and suburbs, as public transport predominantly runs through Dublin city centre; this has led to high levels of car dependence, however the 75 links Tallaght to Rathfarnham, Nutgrove, Ballinteer, Dundrum, Stillorgan and Dun Laoghaire, while the 76 links Tallaght to Clondalkin, Liffey Valley and Ballyfermot.
Routes to the city centre include the 27 (via Jobstown and Tymon Park), 49 (The Square, Aylesbury, Old Bawn, Ballycullen and Firhouse), 54a (Kiltipper, Killinarden Heights, The Square, Tallaght Hospital, Tallaght Village, Balrothery), 56a (The Square, Springfield, Fettercairn and Kingswood), 65 (The Square, Tallaght Hospital, Tallaght Village and Balrothery), 65b (Killinarden Heights, Kiltipper Road, Aylesbury, Old Bawn, Firhouse and Ballycullen) and 77a (Blessington, Killinarden Heights, The Square, Tallaght Hospital, Tallaght Village, Old Bawn, Balrothery and Tymon Park).
A metro rail system is potentially planned for Dublin but on hold following the global financial crisis. Two lines have been proposed: Metro North, running from Dublin city to the airport, and Metro West, which, taking a circuitous route, is proposed to link Tallaght with the major satellite towns west of Dublin, of Clondalkin, Lucan, and Blanchardstown. This metro line will join up with Metro North and continue out to Dublin Airport in Fingal. The first 4 stops of Metro West would be in Tallaght, with the first stop, 'Tallaght East' being situated near Tallaght IT on the Belgard Road.
A Luas extension from Tallaght to Citywest and Saggart has now opened. This is a 4.2 km (2.5 mi) extension, funded by a Public Private Partnership with property developers. Identified as Line A1, this €150 million spur off the Red Line at Belgard runs to Saggart. Originally intended to be a spur off the proposed Red Line to Fortunestown, it was later decided to extend it to Saggart. Construction started on 9 February 2009, with the line completed by early 2011. Passenger services on the 4.2 km light rail link started in early 2011. It serves communities such as Cairnwood, Ambervale, Belgard Green, Fettercairn, Kilmartin, Brookview and Ardmore.

===Population===

The county council stated in 2003 that the population of Tallaght and environs is just under 73,000.  While Tallaght is the seat of South Dublin County, it has no specific local administration in the form of its own local authority. In addition, while there exist two distinct local electoral areas in the form of "Tallaght Central" (based around the historic village core and key modern developments) and "Tallaght South" (the outlying "suburbs" and some rural areas), Tallaght possesses no legal boundary and as a result, it is very difficult to define an official population figure for the area. The population of the village remains modest but the broader area is now one of Ireland's largest population agglomerations. In fact, if the entirety of Tallaght and its broadly-defined environs were taken into account, then the population would be greater than that of Galway city (75,414) and Limerick city (56,779), rendering Tallaght the third largest area of population in the state after Dublin city and Cork city. Irish population statistics are calculated from District Electoral Divisions, and these are often combined to estimate "area populations".  Several localities "historically associated with" Tallaght, have been differently assigned since 1986. The total population from the 2011 census is 71,504, while including all of the remaining electoral divisions redesignated in 1986, gives a figure of 103,301.

===Districts===

"Greater Tallaght" comprises Tallaght village and a range of areas that were formerly small settlements (Jobstown, Old Bawn,  Kilnamanagh) and rural townlands, all developed in recent decades.
The original village of Tallaght lies west of the Tallaght Bypass (N81). It stretches east-west from Main Road and Main Street to the Abberley Court Hotel at the end of High Street, and encompasses the Village Green shopping plaza, Tallaght Courthouse, Westpark, and many shops, restaurants and banks. It also houses Tallaght Youth Service, Tallaght's first newspaper printing house (the Tallaght Echo), and (formally) Tallaght Community Arts Centre. The area's Institute of Technology, Saint Mary's Priory, and Saint Maelruain's Church are located in the historic quarter of Tallaght village.
The newer "town centre" lies immediately to the south across the Belgard Road, encompassing Belgard Square, the main shopping complex (known as The Square also known as the Pyramid), the Luas Red Line terminus, Tallaght Hospital (including the National Children's Hospital), County Hall, the Civic Theatre, South Dublin County Library, Rua Red Arts Centre, and several bars, restaurants and hotels.
To the northeast of the village lies the Tymon North / Balrothery area, which comprised rural townlands until the 1970s. This district includes estates such as Bancroft, Balrothery, Glenview, Castle Park, Saint Aongus, Tymon, Bolbrook and Avonbeg. These parts are home to several sporting facilities, including the National Basketball Arena, a fitness centre, two swimming pools, an athletics track, and an astroturf soccer facility. Tymon Park is watered by the River Poddle, and is Ireland's second largest city park. It borders Greenhills and Templeogue, and it contains extensive sporting grounds, ponds, Coláiste De Hide and one of Ireland's largest playgrounds at the Tymon North entrance.
Old Bawn, formerly a small village in its own right, is immediately south of the village, bordered by Sean Walsh Memorial (also locally called Watergate) Park. To the east of Old Bawn, estates include Home Lawns, Mountain Park, Millbrook Lawns and Seskin View. To the south and southwest of the village lie Ellensborough, Aylesbury, and Killinarden (the latter comprising the residential areas of Deer Park, Cushlawn, Donomore, Killinarden Estate and Knockmore). Beyond these are rural lands, running towards the Wicklow Mountains.
In the northwest is Belgard Green, with Belgard Heights and Kingswood to the north, which are adjacent to Clondalkin, while Kilnamanagh is situated beside Greenhills and south west of Walkinstown and Crumlin. Tallaght Theatre is situated along the Greenhills Road.
Virginia Heights and Springfield are close to the area's centre, and further west of the town centre are the former hamlet of Jobstown, now with dense housing estates, and also the recently-rural areas of Kiltalown, Brookfield and Fettercairn.

===Rural areas===

To the far west, are newer estates such as Deselby, Mountain View, The Belfry, Ardmore, Westbrook Glen, Saggart Abbey, Verschoyle and Carrigmore.

==Features==

Tallaght is home to The Square (abbreviated to "sq."), one of Ireland's largest shopping centres, with three retail levels and accessible by the Luas and extensive bus services. Anchor tenants at the centre include Tesco, Debenhams, Easons, and Dunnes Stores. Tallaght lost its multiplex 12-screen cinema operated by United Cinemas International on 8 March 2010 due to required modernisation being deemed unviable. However, in April 2012, a new, modernised 13-screen cinema operated by I.M.C. opened in place of the old one. Many new retail outlets such as Marks and Spencers have been built in the new town centre.
Three hotels are located in the town centre: the Plaza Hotel near The Square, the Abberley Court Hotel at High Street, the Maldron Hotel at Whitestown Way, near Seán Walshe Park.  The Glashus Hotel and Tallaght Cross Hotel were at "Tallaght Cross" but closed during the financial crisis.Irish Independent, Jan. 9th
The "town centre" area holds offices of local and central government entities, including South Dublin County Council, the Revenue Commissioners, the Department of Social and Family Affairs, the Health Service Executive (Eastern Region), County Dublin V.E.C., as well as local FÁS offices. It is also the location of the County Library, Rua Red - the County Arts Centre, the Civic Theatre, and many shops, bars, and restaurants.
The Adelaide and Meath Hospital, incorporating the National Children's Hospital (commonly known as Tallaght Hospital) is located nearby.
Across the N81 dual carriageway, south of the town centre, is the 6,000 seat soccer ground called Tallaght Stadium. Initially construction was undertaken by Shamrock Rovers F.C. on lands belonging to South Dublin County Council, but the project was marred by financial problems, and the site reverted to council ownership. Work on the site recommenced on 6 May 2008,Tallaght Stadium - Building Recommences May 2008 Shamrock Rovers F.C. Published on 07-05-08. Retrieved on 14-05-08. after a judicial review taken by a local GAA club had been thrown out of court the preceding January.Shamrock Rovers F.C South of this is Sean Walsh Memorial Park.

===St. Maelruain's Church===

===Recent construction===

The "town centre" area has witnessed much construction in recent years, predominantly of new apartment buildings, including Virginia Hall, a twelve storey building on the site of the farmhouse previously known as 'Virginia House' (the base of operations for many years of the Tallaght Community Arts Centre). This new building is currently the tallest in Tallaght. A new arts centre for South Dublin County called Rua Red was recently opened at a site near to County Hall, just south of the new library extension.
Intensive work has been promised in the near future to further integrate Watergate Park with the new town centre. Part of this development will either include transforming a section of the current dual carriageway into a boulevard to better integrate the two areas, or the construction of a pedestrian land-bridge between them.
The original Tallaght village area has recently received a long awaited face-lift in the form of landscaping, works on statues, and new paving. However, several new developments have not yet been completed, giving the unfinished village a ghost town appearance.
ITT is in the process of redeveloping land donated by Saint Mary's Priory for use as sports pitches.

==Politics and government==

Tallaght is represented in the Dublin South–West constituency in Dáil Éireann with four TDs. It is divided into two electoral areas on South Dublin County Council - Tallaght Central and Tallaght South. Altogether 11 councillors are elected. It is regarded as being very left-leaning with the Labour Party and Sinn Féin being the larger parties in the area.

==Education==

Schools in Tallaght include:
St. Mark's National School, St. Mark's Community School, Scoil Maelruain, St. Martin de Porres, St. Dominic's NS, St. Aidan's, St. Thomas', Holy Rosary NS, Scoil Treasa, Old Bawn Community School, Tallaght Community School, Killinarden Community School, Coláiste de hÍde gaelscoil,http://www.colaistedehide.ie/ St. Aidan's Community School, Firhouse Community College and Mount Seskin Community School.
Tallaght is the home of the Institute of Technology Tallaght (ITT), a third-level college offering undergraduate degrees as well as Higher Certificates and post-graduate professional qualifications.
The college was founded in 1992 as the Regional Technical College, Tallaght. It has had a number of name changes since, briefly becoming Tallaght Institute of Technology before being renamed Institute of Technology, Tallaght. It was recently branded Institute of Technology, Tallaght, Dublin (ITT Dublin).

==Sports==

In 2011 the club played its first ever Champions League game and its first game in the highest level of European Cup Competition's since the 1987–88 European Cup, beating Estonian Champions Flora Tallinn in the 2011–12 Champions League Second qualifying round. They accomplished this feat by triumphing 1-0 in the first leg at Tallaght Stadium and drawing 0-0 in the second leg in Estonia to advance 1-0 on aggregate. Rovers were then beaten 3-0 on aggregate in the next round by Danish Champions Copenhagen but advanced to the 2011-12 Europa League Play-off round. There they were drawn against Serbian Champions FK Partizan, whom they defeated 3-2 on aggregate (2-1 on the night after extra time) to reach the group stages of the Europa League. This marked a famous victory for Irish football, as it is the first time an Irish club has reached the group stages of a major European competition. Rovers also won the All Ireland Setanta Sports Cup in 2011 by defeating Dundalk in the final at Tallaght Stadium.Rovers wrapped up a second league title in a row with a last-minute victory over UCD at Belfield on 25 October 2011.[tpl]Cite web|url=http://www.uefa.com/memberassociations/news/newsid=1705603.html|title=Shamrock Rovers retain Irish title|date=26 October 2011|work=UEFA.com|accessdate=26 October 2011[/tpl][tpl]Cite web|url=http://www.irishexaminer.com/breakingnews/ireland/oneill-hails-back-to-back-champions-525798.html|title=O'Neill hails back-to-back champions|date=26 October 2011|work=Irish Examiner|accessdate=26 October 2011[/tpl]

==Arts and entertainment==

==Events==

On 12 July 1998, Tallaght welcomed the Tour de France.[tpl]cite news| url=http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/ireland/1998/0713/98071300035.html | work=The Irish Times | title=Brisk wind blows riders through Tallaght in a flash Tallaght | date=1998-07-07[/tpl] Tallaght always held an annual Saint Patrick's Day parade, but for the past three years this once proud tradition has unfortunately been abandoned. It has also been home to 'Tallafest' and 'NOISE Festivals': youth arts festivals in film, dance and music organised by South Dublin County Council every year[tpl]Citation needed|date=September 2008[/tpl]. There is a farmers' market held every Friday from 10:00 to 16:00 in High Street.[tpl]Citation needed|date=September 2008[/tpl]

==People==

Notable people from Tallaght include

==See also==

==External sources==

| title=South Dublin County Council history of Tallaght|accessdate=2006-03-31}}

==References and footnotes==

==External links==


