[[Phrase (music)]]

CATEGORIES: Formal sections in music analysis, Music performance, Rhythm and meter

In music and music theory, phrase and phrasing are concepts and practices related to grouping consecutive melodic notes, both in their composition and performance. A musical work is typically made up of a melody that consists of numerous consecutive phrases. The notation used is similar to a tie and a slur.

==Musical phrase (theoretical concept)==

A musical phrase ([tpl]lang-gr|φράση[/tpl] "sentence, expression"; see also strophe) is a unit of musical meter that has a complete musical sense of its own,Falk (1958), page 11, Larousse cited in Nattiez, Jean-Jacques (1990). Music and Discourse: Toward a Semiology of Music (Musicologie générale et sémiologue, 1987). Translated by Carolyn Abbate (1990). ISBN 0-691-02714-5. built from figures, motifs, and cells and combining to form melodies, periods and larger sections;1980 New Grove cited in Nattiez 1990. or the length in which a singer or instrumentalist can play in one breath.
The terms, like sentence, verse etc., have been adopted into the vocabulary of music from linguistic syntax.1958 Encyclopédie Fasquelle cited in Nattiez 1990. Though the analogy between the musical and the linguistic phrase is often made, still the term "is one of the most ambiguous in music....there is no consistency in applying these terms nor can there be...only with melodies of a very simple type, especially those of some dances, can the terms be used with some consistency."Stein, Deborah (2005). Engaging Music: Essays in Music Analysis. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-517010-5.
John D. White defines a phrase as, "the smallest musical unit which conveys a more or less complete musical thought. Phrases vary in length and are terminated at a point of full or partial repose, which is called a cadence."White (1976), p.34. Italics original. Edward Cone analyses the "typical musical phrase" as consisting of an "initial downbeat, a period of motion, and a point of arrival marked by a cadential downbeat".Winold, Allen (1975). "Rhythm in Twentieth-Century Music", Aspects of Twentieth-Century Music. Wittlich, Gary (ed.). Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. ISBN 0-13-049346-5. Charles Burkhart defines a phrase as "Any group of measures (including a group of one, or possibly even a fraction of one) that has some degree of structural completeness. What counts is the sense of completeness we hear in the pitches not the notation on the page. To be complete such a group must have an ending of some kind … . Phrases are delineated by the tonal functions of pitch. They are not created'' by slur or by legato performance … . A phrase is not pitches only but also has a rhythmic dimension, and further, each phrase in a work contributes to that work's large rhythmic organization."Burkhart, Charles. "The Phrase Rhythm of Chopin's A-flat Major Mazurka, Op. 59, No. 2" cited in Stein 2005.
In common practice phrases are often four bars or measures longLarousse, Davie 1966, 19 cited in Nattiez 1990. culminating in a more or less definite cadence.Larousse cited in Nattiez 1990. A phrase will end with a weaker or stronger cadence, depending on whether it is an antecedent phrase or a consequent phrase, the first or second half of a period.
A phrase-group is, "a group of three or more phrases linked together without the two-part feeling of a period," or, "a pair of consecutive phrases in which the first is a repetition of the second or in which, for whatever reason, the antecedent-consequent relationship is absent."White (1976), p.46. 
Phrase rhythm is the rhythmic aspect of phrase construction and the relationships between phrases, and "is not at all a cut-and-dried affair, but the very lifeblood of music and capable of infinite variety. Discovering a work's phrase rhythm is a gateway to its understanding and to effective performance." The term was popularized by William Rothstein's Phrase Rhythm in Tonal Music. Techniques include overlap, lead-in, extension, expansion, reinterpretation and elision.
The act of shaping a phrase during performance is called musical phrasing and considered an art.

==Musical phrasing==

Phrasing refers to an expressive shaping of music, and relates to the shaping of notes in time. Phrasing relates to the manner of playing the individual notes of a particular group of consecutive notes and the way they are weighted and shaped relative to one another. It does not refer to the idealized note values/durations as represented in sheet music, but to the multitude of deviations that the performer needs to make from sheet music if a performance is to be expressive in a particular style and culturally aware. An example may be an acceleration of a group of notes, but there are many more. This shaping of notes is creatively performed by the musician with the aim of expressing (feelings), and can be distinguished by the listener – not only factually, but in music, as emotional expression.
Being an expressive activity of creative musicians, the question of how to shape a group of notes in time cannot be (and is not) exactly specified. Giuseppe Cambini had this to say about violin playing: 
Usually, the shaping of notes in time is such that meaning ("affections of the soul") is expressed. In general, particular musical thoughts appear in a group of notes following each other, forming a phrase: a particular part of a melody. These notes belong together and the melodic phrase is then shaped expressively: tension can be built up by accelerating; particular expressive pivot points or emphasis can shaped by holding notes longer (fermata); slowing down can be used to end phrases; rubato, etc. 
Phrasing is sometimes also taken to include aspects of musical shaping, other than the timing of melodies, such as articulation and dynamics, etc.
It can also be influenced by lyrics on the song in relation to the piece of musical phrase in sheet music.

==Intuitive versus analytical approach to phrase/phrasing==

There are two ways/manners in which phrase/phrasing can be approached: intuitive, or analytical.
Often the analytical method is more theoretical and related to the term phrase (analysing a phrase), while the intuitive approach is more related to the term phrasing.
Problems linked with an analytical approach to phrase, occur particularly when the analytical approach is based only on the search for objective information, or (as is often the case) only concerned with the score:

==Sources==

==See also==

==External links==


