[[Café Naturale]]

CATEGORIES: 2004 albums, Wendy Matthews albums

Café Naturale is the seventh studio album by singer Wendy Matthews released by BMG in Australia on 24 May 2004. It is an album of cover songs Matthews and the album's producer Michael Szumowski chose themselves. Matthews enjoyed recording this album and felt the songs came together naturally, she also felt she broke down some personal barriers. The album yielded only one single, "All I Need".
In 2002, Matthews moved to a coastal haven outside Coffs Harbour, New South Wales. She spent a lot of time in her favourite cafe listening to records and explains "there’s nothing like a song to bring you back to a specific moment or feeling in time.""Wendy Matthews - Australian Music Online profile". Amo.org.au. Retrieved 3 August 2009. This lead her to name the album Café Naturale. She was also surprised by some of the song choices. Matthews states "Once we got into the studio the record started to reveal its personality to me. It all came together and the songs, these very melodic songs, started to make themselves known. It just worked." Matthews believes this record seems charmed and she'd love for this record to play in someone’s favourite café and inspire a few memories.
The thought behind the album's cover artwork comes from a painting of a woman on a wall on Edgecliff Road in Sydney, Australia by Bruno Dutot in 1987. Matthews approached Dutot and she asked him to commission a painting of this woman for her cover. She states "basically, he's painted her as me with a chopstick in her hair and my dog at the feet. Every time I'm in Sydney I have to go and check the lady on the wall, what colour dress she's wearing this month, whether she's changed and she looks so cafe society to me, so I'm thrilled and honoured that he actually did a painting for this cover.""ARCHIVED WENDY NEWS - APRIL / AUGUST 2004". Wendymatthews.com.au. Retrieved 3 August 2009. Matthews states the painting has come to symbolise Sydney for her.

==Track listing==

==Charts==

==References==


