[[George Reinholt]]

CATEGORIES: 1940 births, American male soap opera actors, 2013 deaths, American male television actors, 20th-century American male actors, Male actors from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Cancer deaths in Pennsylvania

George Kilpatrick Reinholt  (August 22, 1940 — November 11, 2013) was an American actor.
Reinholt is best known for his soap roles: Steve Frame on Another World from 1968 to 1975, and Tony Harris Lord on One Life to Live from 1975 to 1977.
He was fired from Another World in 1975 when head writer Harding Lemay wrote him out of the program. In his memoir, Eight Years in Another World, Lemay had pegged Reinholt's behavior to be not unlike a diva. Reinholt was known for giving interviews from the soap press in which he criticized the show's writing. Lemay also said that Reinholt's acting style was uneven, and that he could be brilliant in one scene and then mediocre in the next. The final straw seemed to come when he tried to prevent both Lemay and executive producer Paul Rauch from introducing Steve's family to the AW canvas, and Lemay wrote him off of AW by killing his character off in a helicopter crash (Steve would eventually return to the show in the early 1980s, played by David Canary). In a well-publicized move, Reinholt nabbed jobs both for him and his on-screen love interest, Jacqueline Courtney, on rival soap One Life to Live. Reinholt made it a point of letting the press know that he was happy to be leaving AW and going to a soap that knows how to write for actors.
After retiring from acting Reinholt swore off any comebacks in the medium. His resolve was weakened twice, once when he returned briefly for AW's 25th anniversary show in 1989, and another time when he considered returning in the mid-1990s. However he was not hired for any of the jobs he tested for.
In 1997 Reinholt placed an ad in a local paper offering his services to take women to parties or other events. Some of the press implied he was selling himself as an escort, in a sexual manner. Reinholt was furious and appeared on the Sally Jessy Raphael talk show to clear up the record.
On November 11, 2013 Reinholt died of cancer at his home in Essington, Pennsylvania at the age of 73.

==References==

==External links==


