[[Washoe people]]

CATEGORIES: Washoe tribe, Native American tribes in California, Native American tribes in Nevada, Native American history of Nevada, Indigenous peoples of the Great Basin

The  Washoe are a Great Basin tribe of Native Americans, living in California and Nevada. The name "Washoe" is derived from the autonym waashiw (wa·šiw) meaning "people from here" in the Washo language (transliterated in older literature as Wa She Shu (Wašišiw)the plural form of wašiw).

==Territory==

Washoe people have lived in the Great Basin for at least the last 6000 years.Pritzker, 246 Prior to contact with Europeans, the territory of the Washoe people was roughly bounded by the southern shore of Honey Lake in the north, the west fork of the Walker River in the south, the Sierra Nevada crest in the west, and the first range east of the Sierra Nevada in the east.  The Washoe would generally spend the summer in the Sierra Nevada, the fall in the ranges to the east, and the winter and spring in the valleys between them.

==History==

Washoe people are the only Great Basin tribe whose language is not Numic, so they are believed to have inhabited the region before neighboring tribes. The Kings Beach Complex that emerged around 500 CE around Lake Tahoe and the northern Sierra Nevadas are regarded as early Washoe culture. The Martis complex may have overlapped with the Kings Beach culture, and Martis pit houses gave way to conical bark slab houses of historic Washoe culture.D'Azevedo, 466
The Washoe people and the neighboring Northern Paiute people were culturally and linguistically very different, and they sometimes came into conflict.
Washoe people may have made contact with Spanish explorers in the early 19th century, but the Washoe did not sustain contact with people of European culture until the 1848 California Gold Rush. Washoe resistance to incursions on their lands proved futile, and the last armed conflict with the Washoes and non-Indians was the "Potato War" of 1857, when starving Washoes were killed for gathering potatoes from a European-American farm near Honey Lake in California.D'Azevedo, 494
Loss of the valley hunting grounds to farms and the Piñon pine groves to feed Virginia City's demand for lumber and charcoal drove most Washoe to dependency on jobs in white ranches, farms and cities. The areas where they settled became known as Indian colonies.

==Culture==

Piñon pine nuts gathered in the fall provided much of the food eaten in the winter. Roots, seeds, berries and game provided much of the food eaten in the rest of the year. The Washoe people were also deeply knowledgeable about their land and where resources were plentiful. This include an understanding of the seasonal cycles on both plants and animals. Wašiw people were also dependent on fishing at Lake Tahoe and the surrounding streams. Fishing was a huge part of Wašiw life and each family had their own fishing grounds until contact with western civilization led to commercial fishing in the area, destroying another important resource for the Wašiw.Dangberg 1968, d'Azevedo 1986, Nevers 1976
The Pine Nut Dance and girls' puberty rites remain very important ceremonies.Pritzker, 246, 248 The Wašiw people once relied on medicine men and their innate knowledge of medicinal plants and ceremonies. Much of this knowledge and activity has been lost due to contact with the Western world and practices enacted to destroy a Wašiw way of life on behalf of the federal government.

==Language==

The Washoe language is tentatively regarded as part of the Hokan language family;Pritzker, 220 however, it is also considered to be a  language isolate."Washoe Indian Tribe History." Access Genealogy. (retrieved 11 May 2010) The Wašiw language is now considered a moribund language as only a handful of fluent elder speakers use the language. There has been a recent resurgence of the language and culture within the Tribe. "Wašiw Wagayay Maŋal" (the "house where Wašiw is spoken") was the first attempt by the Wašiw people to renew their language for the future generations. The tribe currently relies on the Cultural Resource Department to provide language classes to the community. However, there has recently been a pedagogical shift within the tribe as the youth have become the focal point of language and culture programs, because they are they future.

==Washoe tribes==

Under the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, the colonies in the Carson Valley area of Nevada and California gained federal recognition as the Washoe Tribe of Nevada and California.  The colony at Reno, Nevada, which also had a substantial Paiute and Shoshoni population, gained separate recognition as the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony. There is evidence that some Washoe settled into the southwest region of Montana. The Susanville Rancheria includes Washoe members, as well as Northern Paiute, Northeastern Maidu, Achomawi and Atsugewi members."California Indians and Their Reservations." SDSU Library and Information Access. (retrieved 11 May 2010)

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==


