[[Charles Keating (actor)]]

CATEGORIES: English male soap opera actors, English male television actors, English male stage actors, English expatriates in the United States, English people of Irish descent, Male actors from London, 1941 births, Living people, Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series winners

Charles Keating is a British actor of stage, screen, and television, and narrator of audiobooks.
Of Irish Catholic extraction, Keating was born on 22 October 1941 in London, England, the son of Charles James Keating and Margaret Shevlin http://www.filmreference.com/film/42/Charles-Keating.html. He appeared with the Royal Shakespeare Company at Stratford-upon-Avon before turning to television (he was in the pilot episode of the long-running ITV series Crown Court in 1972), winning the role of Rex Mottram in ITV's celebrated adaptation of Brideshead Revisited.
Among other soap roles, he is best known for his role as reformed villain Carl Hutchins on the American soap opera Another World from 1983 to 1985, and again from 1991 to 1998 with a final appearance in 1999. After the show's demise, he returned to stage acting and to Shakespeare, most notably in a two-person show with Another World actress Victoria Wyndham. In between stints on Another World. he played the evil psychiatrist Dr. Damon Lazarre on All My Children (scheming with Goldie Kane to kill her stepdaughter Erica) and the equally nefarious Niles Mason on As the World Turns who schemed with his son to steal Lucinda Walsh's fortune.
He had also had a role as a professor at a Caribbean medical school which catered to Americans in the short-lived ABC sitcom, Going to Extremes, as well as a guest role on Sex and the City, in which he played an artist obsessed with painting "cunts".  In 2005, he had a supporting role in the movie Deuce Bigalow: European Gigolo, starring Rob Schneider.
Broadway roles include Loot by Joe Orton (1986), The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui (1968), and The House of Atreus (1968) which comprised the shows Agamemnon, Choephori, and Eumenides.  More recently (2001), he played the role of Carney/Oscar Wilde in the Lincoln Center Theater Performance of A Man of No Importance.  In 2007, he played the role of Clement O'Donnell in the Guthrie Theater production of The Home Place by Brian Friel.

==External links==


