[[Globalism]]

CATEGORIES: Buzzwords, Ideologies, International relations theory, Globalism, Globalization terminology, Postmodernism, Social theories, World government

The concept of globalism now is most commonly used to refer to different ideologies of globalization. The clearest rendition of this use is Manfred Steger's. He distinguishes different globalisms such as justice globalism, jihad globalism, and market globalism.Manfred B. Steger, The rise of the global imaginary: political ideologies from the French Revolution to the global war on terror, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2008. Market globalisms include the ideology of neoliberalism.
Globalism emerged as a set of associated ideologies across the course of the late twentieth century. As these ideologies settled, and as various processes of globalization intensified, they contributed to the consolidation of a connecting global imaginary.Manfred B. Steger, The rise of the global imaginary: political ideologies from the French Revolution to the global war on terror, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2008. In their recent writings Manfred Steger and Paul James have theorized this process in terms of four levels of change: changing ideas, ideologies, imaginaries and ontologies.Manfred B. Steger and Paul James, ‘Ideologies of Globalism’, in Paul James and Manfred B. Steger, eds, Globalization and Culture: Vol. 4, Ideologies of Globalism, Sage Publications, London, 2010. download pdf http://uws.academia.edu/PaulJames
In some hands, the reduction of globalism to market globalism and neoliberalism has led to confusion. For example, in his 2005 book The Collapse of Globalism and the Reinvention of the World, Canadian philosopher John Ralston Saul treated globalism as coterminous with neoliberalism and neoliberal globalization. He argued that, far from being an inevitable force, globalization is already breaking up into contradictory pieces and that citizens are reasserting their national interests in both positive and destructive ways.
American political scientist Joseph Nye, co-founder of the international relations theory of neoliberalism, generalized the term to argue that globalism refers to any description and explanation of a world which is characterized by networks of connections that span multi-continental distances; while globalization refers to the increase or decline in the degree of globalism.Joseph Nye, "Globalism Versus Globalization" http://www.theglobalist.com/StoryId.aspx?StoryId=2392 This more general use of the concept is much less influential.

==See also==

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==


