[[Julie Caitlin Brown]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, American television actresses, Living people, Actresses from San Francisco, California, American stage actresses

Julie Caitlin Brown (born January 27, 1961) is an American actress and musician known for her role as Na'Toth in the first and fifth season of the science fiction television series Babylon 5.

==Career==

Her first stage role was as Mary Magdalene in a 1983 professional production of Jesus Christ Superstar. In the late 1980s, Brown branched out into commercial and television work in Florida; in 1990 she moved to New York City where she appeared in Williamstown Theatre Festival production of A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum and Broadway production of Grand Hotel.''
In 1992, Brown moved back to California and appeared in guest-starring roles on several series. Following the departure of Mary Woronov from the series and the last-minute loss of originally cast Susan Kellerman, Babylon 5's casting director called her and unexpectedly offered her the role of Na'Toth on the first season of the science-fiction series.
The extensive makeup and prosthetics necessary to transform actors into Narns proved intolerable for most actors; it was in fact the reason Woronov and Kellerman left almost immediately. Brown appeared in five episodes and declined to stay for a second season. The role of Na'Toth was recast with Mary Kay Adams, and Brown went on to return for guest appearances during the second season (as a human lawyer) and the fifth season (reprising the role of Na'Toth).
Brown's other television guest credits include JAG, Beverly Hills, 90210, Star Trek: Deep Space Nine (in the episode "The Passenger") and Star Trek: The Next Generation.Julie Caitlin Brown at Memory Alpha (a Star Trek wiki) In 2009 portrayed in a lead role Tammy Tennis in Joshua Grannell's comedy horror film All About Evil.Christ Teaches Us All About Evil The short film Thoughts of Suicide on an Otherwise Lovely Day, which was written and  produced, and in which she stars, is currently on the festival circuit.
Also a singer, Brown's first CD, Sheddin' My Skin, was released in January 1998. Her second album, Struck by Lightning, came out July 2002. She is also involved in several stage and television projects still in development.
Brown also appeared in Peaches Christ's All About Evil with Cassandra Peterson, Mink Stole and Patrick Bristow.

==References==

==External links==


