[[Nero]]

CATEGORIES: Nero, 1st-century Roman emperors, 37 births, 68 deaths, Claudii, Domitii, Forced suicides, Julio-Claudian dynasty, Matricides, Ousted heads of state, People from the Province of Rome, Philhellenes, Roman emperors to suffer posthumous denigration or damnatio memoriae, Roman emperors who committed suicide, Roman-era Olympic competitors, Suicides by sharp instrument in Italy, Talmud people

Nero ([tpl]IPAc-en|ˈ|n|ɪər|oʊ[/tpl]; Latin: Nero Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus;In Classical Latin, Nero's name would be inscribed as NERO CLAVDIVS CAESAR AVGVSTVS GERMANICVS. 15 December 37 – 9 June 68)Nero's birth day is listed in Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 6. His death day is uncertain, though, perhaps because Galba was declared emperor before Nero died. The date of 9 June is calculated from Jerome, Chronicle, which lists Nero's rule as 13 years, 7 months and 28 days. Cassius Dio, Roman History LXII.3 and Josephus, War of the Jews IV, say Nero's rule was 13 years, 8 months which would be until 11 June. was Roman Emperor from 54 to 68, and the last in the Julio-Claudian dynasty. Nero was adopted by his great-uncle Claudius to become his heir and successor, and succeeded to the throne in 54 following Claudius' death.
Nero focused much of his attention on diplomacy, trade, and enhancing the cultural life of the Empire. He ordered theaters built and promoted athletic games. During his reign, the redoubtable general Corbulo conducted a successful war and negotiated peace with the Parthian Empire. His general Suetonius Paulinus crushed a revolt in Britain. Nero annexed the Bosporan Kingdom to the Empire and began the First Roman–Jewish War.
In 64 AD, most of Rome was destroyed in the Great Fire of Rome, which many Romans believed Nero himself had started in order to clear land for his planned palatial complex, the Domus Aurea. In 68, the rebellion of Vindex in Gaul and later the acclamation of Galba in Hispania drove Nero from the throne. Facing assassination, he committed suicide on 9 June 68 (the first Roman emperor to do so).Suetonius states that Nero committed suicide in Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 49; Sulpicius Severus, who possibly used Tacitus' lost fragments as a source, reports that is was uncertain whether Nero committed suicide, Sulpicius Severus, Chronica II.29, also see T.D. Barnes, "The Fragments of Tacitus' Histories", Classical Philology (1977), p. 228. His death ended the Julio-Claudian Dynasty, sparking a brief period of civil wars known as the Year of the Four Emperors. Nero's rule is often associated with tyranny and extravagance.Galba criticized Nero's luxuria, both his public and private excessive spending, during rebellion, Tacitus, Annals I.16; Kragelund, Patrick, "Nero's Luxuria, in Tacitus and in the Octavia", The Classical Quarterly, 2000, pp. 494–515. He is known for many executions, including that of his mother,References to Nero's matricide appear in the Sibylline Oracles 5.490–520, Geoffrey Chaucer's Canterbury Tales The Monk's Tale, and William Shakespeare's Hamlet 3.ii. and the probable murder by poison of his stepbrother Britannicus.
He is infamously known as the Emperor who "fiddled while Rome burned"Nero was not a fiddle player, but a lyre player (the fiddle was not invented for at least another 1500 years). Suetonius states Nero played the lyre while Rome burned, see Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 38; For a detailed explanation of this transition see M. F. Gyles "Nero Fiddled while Rome Burned", The Classical Journal 42, no. 4 (January  1947), pp. 211–17 – nevertheless, the idea that Nero played any kind of musical instrument is an urban legend, since he was away from Rome at the time of the fire. http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/secondary/journals/CJ/42/4/Nero_Fiddled*.html. and as an early persecutor of Christians. He was known for having captured Christians to burn them in his garden at night for a source of light. This view is based on the writings of Tacitus, Suetonius, and Cassius Dio, the main surviving sources for Nero's reign. Few surviving sources paint Nero in a favorable light.These include Lucan's Civil War, Seneca the Younger's On Mercy and Dio Chrysostom's Discourses along with various Roman coins and inscriptions. Some sources, though, including some mentioned above, portray him as an emperor who was popular with the common Roman people, especially in the East.Tacitus, Histories I.4, I.5, I.13, II.8; Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 57, Life of Otho 7, Life of Vitellius 11; Philostratus II, The Life of Apollonius 5.41; Dio Chrysostom, Discourse XXI, On Beauty. Some modern historians question the reliability of ancient sources when reporting on Nero's tyrannical acts.On fire and Christian persecution, see F.W. Clayton, "Tacitus and Christian Persecution", The Classical Quarterly, pp. 81–85; B.W. Henderson, Life and Principate of the Emperor Nero, p. 437; On general bias against Nero, see Edward Champlin, Nero, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003, pp. 36–52 (ISBN 0-674-01192-9

==Early life==

===Family===

Marcus Domitius Ahenobarbus, the future Nero, was born on 15 December 37 in Antium, near Rome.Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 1.Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 6. He was the only son of Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus and Agrippina the Younger, sister of Emperor Caligula.
Nero's father Gnaeus was the son of Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (consul 16 BC) and Antonia Major. Gnaeus was thus the grandson of Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus (consul 32 BC) and probably Aemilia Lepida on his father's side, and the grandson of Mark Antony and Octavia Minor on his mother's side. Thus, Nero had as his paternal grandmother Antonia Maior, and also claimed more remote descent from Antonia Minor as a great-grandson—later grandson after Claudius adopted him.Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 5.
Through Octavia, Nero was the grandnephew of Caesar Augustus. Nero's father had been employed as a praetor and was a member of Caligula's staff when the latter traveled to the East (some apparently think Suetonius refers to Augustus' adopted son Gaius Caesar here, but this is not likely).Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 5.
Nero's father was described by Suetonius as a murderer and a cheat who was charged by Emperor Tiberius with treason, adultery, and incest. Tiberius died, allowing him to escape these charges. Nero's father died of edema ("dropsy") in 39 when Nero was two.
Nero's mother was Agrippina the Younger, a great-granddaughter of Caesar Augustus and his wife Scribonia through their daughter Julia the Elder and her husband Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa. Agrippina's father, Germanicus, was a grandson of Augustus's wife, Livia, on one side and to Mark Antony and Octavia on the other. Germanicus' mother Antonia Minor, was a daughter of Octavia Minor and Mark Antony. Octavia was Augustus' elder sister. Germanicus was also the adopted son of Tiberius. Agrippina poisoned her second husband Passienus Crispus, so many ancient historians also accuse her of murdering her third husband, the emperor Claudius.Tacitus, Annals XII.66; Cassius Dio, Roman History LXI.34; Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Claudius 44; Josephus is less sure, Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews XX.8.1.

===Rise to power===

Nero was not expected to become Emperor because his maternal uncle, Caligula, had begun his reign at the age of 25 with enough time to produce his own heir. Nero's mother, Agrippina, lost favour with Caligula and was exiled in 39 after her husband's death.Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Caligula 29. Caligula seized Nero's inheritance and sent him to be raised by his less wealthy aunt, Domitia Lepida, who was the mother of Valeria Messalina, Claudius's third wife.
Caligula, his wife Caesonia and their infant daughter Julia Drusilla were murdered on 24 January 41.Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews XIX.1.14, XIX.2.4. These events led Claudius, Caligula's uncle, to become emperor.Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews XIX.3.2. Claudius allowed Agrippina to return from exile.
Claudius had married twice before marrying Valeria Messalina.Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Claudius 26. His previous marriages produced three children including a son, Drusus, who died at a young age.Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Claudius 27. He had two children with Messalina – Claudia Octavia (born 40) and Britannicus (born 41). Messalina was executed by Claudius in the year 48.
In 49 AD, Claudius married a fourth time, to Nero's mother Agrippina, despite her being his niece. To aid Claudius politically, young Nero was adopted in 50 and took the name Nero Claudius Caesar Drusus Germanicus (see adoption in Rome).Tacitus, Annals XII.25. Nero was older than his stepbrother Britannicus, and thus became heir to the throne.Tacitus, Annals XII.26.
Nero was proclaimed an adult in 51 at the age of 14.Tacitus, Annals XII.41. He was appointed proconsul, entered and first addressed the Senate, made joint public appearances with Claudius, and was featured in coinage. In 53, he married his stepsister Claudia Octavia.Tacitus, Annals XII.58.

==Emperor (54 AD)==

===Early rule===

Claudius died in 54 and Nero, taking the name Nero Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus, was established as Emperor. Though accounts vary, many ancient historians state Agrippina poisoned Claudius. According to Pliny the Elder, she used poison mushrooms.On the Mushroom that Deified the Emperor Claudius It is not known how much Nero knew or if he was even involved in the death of Claudius.Cassius Dio's and Suetonius' accounts claim Nero knew of the murder, Cassius Dio, Roman History LXI.35, Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 33; Tacitus' and Josephus' accounts only mention Agrippina, Tacitus, Annals XII.65, Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews XX.8.1.
Nero became Emperor at 17 when the news of Claudius' death was made known,Book LXI #3 P39#8 P100 the youngest emperor until that time.Augustus was 35, Tiberius was 56, Caligula was 25 and Claudius was 50. Ancient historians describe Nero's early reign as being strongly influenced by his mother, Agrippina, his tutor Lucius Annaeus Seneca, and the Praetorian Prefect Sextus Afranius Burrus, especially in the first year.Cassius Dio claims "At first Agrippina managed for him all the business of the empire", then Seneca and Burrus "took the rule entirely into their own hands,", but "after the death of Britannicus, Seneca and Burrus no longer gave any careful attention to the public business" in 55, Cassius Dio, Roman History LXI.3–7. Other tutors were less often mentioned, such as Alexander of Aegae.[tpl]cite encyclopedia|last=Jowett|first=Benjamin|authorlink=Benjamin Jowett|title=Alexander of Aegae|editor=William Smith|encyclopedia=Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology|volume=1|pages=110–111|publisher=Little, Brown and Company|location=Boston|year=1867|url=http://www.ancientlibrary.com/smith-bio/0119.html|editor-link=William Smith (lexicographer) [/tpl]
Very early in Nero's rule, problems arose from competition for influence between Agrippina and Nero's two main advisers, Seneca and Burrus.
In 54, Agrippina tried to sit down next to Nero while he met with an Armenian envoy, but Seneca stopped her and prevented a scandalous sceneTacitus, Annals XIII.5. (as it was unimaginable at that time for a woman to be in the same room as men doing official business). Nero's friends also mistrusted Agrippina and told Nero to beware of his mother.Tacitus, Annals XIII.13.
Nero was reportedly unsatisfied with his marriage to Octavia and entered into an affair with Claudia Acte, a former slave.Tacitus, Annals XIII.12. In 55, Agrippina attempted to intervene in favor of Octavia and demanded that her son dismiss Acte. Nero, with the support of Seneca, resisted the intervention of his mother in his personal affairs.
With Agrippina's influence over her son severed, she reportedly began pushing for Britannicus, Nero's stepbrother, to become emperor.Tacitus, Annals XIII.14. Nearly fourteen-year-old Britannicus, heir-designate prior to Nero's adoption, was still legally a minor, but was approaching legal adulthood. According to Tacitus, Agrippina hoped that with her support, Britannicus, being the blood son of Claudius, would be seen as the true heir to the throne by the state over Nero. However, the youth died suddenly and suspiciously on 12 February 55, the very day before his proclamation as an adult had been set.Tacitus, Annals XIII.16.
Nero claimed that Britannicus died from an epileptic seizure, but ancient historians all claim Britannicus' death came from Nero's poisoning him. Supposedly, he enlisted the services of Locusta, a woman who specialized in the manufacture of poisons. She devised a mixture to kill Britannicus, but after testing it unsuccessfully on a slave, Nero angrily threatened to have her put to death if she did not come up with something usable. Locusta then devised a new concoction that she promised would "kill swifter than a viper."Tacitus, Annals XIII.16; Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews, XX.8.2; Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 33; Cassius Dio, Roman History LXI.7.
Her promise was fulfilled after Britannicus consumed it at a dinner party from water used to cool his wine, which had already been tasted, and succumbed within minutes. After the death of Britannicus, Agrippina was accused of slandering Octavia and Nero ordered her out of the imperial residence.Tacitus, Annals XIII.18–21.

===Matricide and consolidation of power===

Over time, Nero became progressively more powerful, freeing himself of his advisers and eliminating rivals to the throne. In 55, he removed Marcus Antonius Pallas, an ally of Agrippina, from his position in the treasury. Pallas, along with Burrus, was accused of conspiring against the Emperor to bring Faustus Sulla to the throne.Tacitus, Annals XIII.23. Seneca was accused of having relations with Agrippina and embezzlement.Cassius Dio, Roman History LXI.10. Seneca succeeded in having himself, Pallas and Burrus acquitted. According to Cassius Dio, at this time, Seneca and Burrus reduced their role in governing from careful management to mere moderation of Nero.Cassius Dio, Roman History LXI.7.
In 58, Nero became romantically involved with Poppaea Sabina, the wife of his friend and future emperor Otho.Tacitus, Annals XIII.46. Reportedly because a marriage to Poppaea and a divorce from Octavia did not seem politically feasible with Agrippina alive, Nero ordered the murder of his mother in 59.Tacitus, Annals XIV.1. A number of modern historians find this an unlikely motive as Nero did not marry Poppaea until 62 .Dawson, Alexis, "Whatever Happened to Lady Agrippina?", The Classical Journal, 1969, p. 254.
Additionally, according to Suetonius, Poppaea did not divorce her husband until after Agrippina's death, making it unlikely that the already married Poppaea would be pressing Nero for marriage.Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Otho 3. Some modern historians theorize that Nero's execution of Agrippina was prompted by her plotting to set Rubellius Plautus on the throne.Rogers, Robert, Heirs and Rivals to Nero, Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological Association, Vol. 86. (1955), p. 202. Silana accuses Agrippina of plotting to bring up Plautus in 55, Tacitus, Annals XIII.19; Silana is recalled from exile after Agrippina's power waned, Tacitus, Annals XIV.12; Plautus is exiled in 60, Tacitus, Annals XIV.22. According to Suetonius, Nero tried to kill his mother through a planned shipwreck, which took the life of her friend, Acerronia Polla, but when Agrippina survived, he had her executed and framed it as a suicide.Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 34. The incident is also recorded by Tacitus.Tacitus, "The Annals".
In 62, Nero's adviser, Burrus, died.Tacitus, Annals XIV.51. Additionally, Seneca was again faced with embezzlement charges.Tacitus, Annals XIV.52. Seneca asked Nero for permission to retire from public affairs.Tacitus, Annals XIV.53. Nero divorced and banished Octavia on grounds of infertility, leaving him free to marry the pregnant Poppaea.Tacitus, Annals XIV.60. After public protests, Nero was forced to allow Octavia to return from exile, but she was executed shortly after her return.Tacitus, Annals XIV.64.
Nero also was reported to have kicked Poppaea to death in 65 before she could have his second child.Farquhar, Michael (2001). A Treasure of Royal Scandals, p.216. Penguin Books, New York. ISBN 0-7394-2025-9. However, modern historians, noting Suetonius, Tacitus and Cassius Dio's possible bias against Nero and the likelihood that they did not have eyewitness accounts of private events, postulate that Poppaea may have died because of complications of miscarriage or childbirth.Rudich, Vasily, Political Dissidence Under Nero, p. 134.
Accusations of treason being plotted against Nero and the Senate first appeared in 62.Tacitus, Annals XIV.48. The Senate ruled that Antistius, a praetor, should be put to death for speaking ill of Nero at a party. Later, Nero ordered the exile of Fabricius Veiento who slandered the Senate in a book.Tacitus, Annals XIV.49. Tacitus writes that the roots of the conspiracy led by Gaius Calpurnius Piso began in this year. To consolidate power, Nero executed a number of people in 62 and 63 including his rivals Pallas, Rubellius Plautus and Faustus Sulla.Tacitus, Annals XIV.65. According to Suetonius, Nero "showed neither discrimination nor moderation in putting to death whomsoever he pleased" during this period.Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 37.
Nero's consolidation of power also included a slow usurping of authority from the Senate. In 54, Nero promised to give the Senate powers equivalent to those under Republican rule.Tacitus, Annals XIII.4. By 65, senators complained that they had no power left and this led to the Pisonian conspiracy.Tacitus, Annals XV.51.

===Other relationships===

When Nero's wife Poppaea Sabina died in 65, Nero went into deep mourning. Her body was not cremated, it was stuffed with spices, embalmed and put in the Mausoleum of Augustus.  She was given a state funeral. Nero praised her during the funeral eulogy and gave her divine honors. It is said that Nero "burned ten years' worth of Arabia's incense production at her funeral.Donato and Seefried (1989), p. 55.
In the beginning of 66, he married Statilia Messalina. She was already married when she became Nero's mistress in 65 AD, with Statilia's husband being driven to suicide in 66, so Nero could marry Statilia. She was one of the few of Nero's courtiers who survived the fall of his reign.
In 67, Nero ordered a young freedman, Sporus, to be castrated and then married him.Champlin, 2005, p.145Ancient History Sourcebook: Suetonius: De Vita Caesarum--Nero, c. 110 C.E.Cassius Dio Roman History: LXII, 28 - LXIII, 12-13Smith, 1849, p.897 According to Dion Cassius, Sporus bore an uncanny resemblance to Sabina, and Nero even called him by his dead wife's name.[tpl]cite book |title=Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology |author=Smith, William |authorlink=William Smith (lexicographer) |publisher=C. C. Little and J. Brown; etc.  |volume=3 |year=1849 |pages=1411, 2012|lccn=07038839[/tpl]

===Administrative policies===

Over the course of his reign, Nero often made rulings that pleased the lower class. Nero was criticized as being obsessed with personal popularity.Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 53; Gibbon, Edward, The History of The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire Vol. I, Chap. VI.
Nero began his reign in 54 by promising the Senate more autonomy. In this first year, he forbade others to refer to him with regard to enactments, for which he was praised by the Senate.Tacitus, Annals XIII.25. Nero was known for spending his time visiting brothels and taverns during this period.
In 55, Nero began taking on a more active role as an administrator. He was consul four times between 55 and 60. During this period, some ancient historians speak fairly well of Nero and contrast it with his later rule.Aurelius Victor mentions Trajan's praise of Nero's first five or so years. Aurelius Victor The Style of Life and the Manners of the Imperitors 5; The unknown author of Epitome de Caesaribus also mentions Trajan's praise of the first five or so years of Nero Auctor incertus Epitome De Caesarbius 5.
Under Nero, restrictions were put on the amount of bail and fines.Tacitus, Annals XIII.28. Also, fees for lawyers were limited.Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 17. There was a discussion in the Senate on the misconduct of the freedmen class, and a strong demand was made that patrons should have the right of revoking freedom.Tacitus, Annals XIII.26. Nero supported the freedmen and ruled that patrons had no such right.Tacitus, Annals XIII.27.
The Senate tried to pass a law in which the crimes of one slave applied to all slaves within a household. Despite riots from the people, Nero supported the Senate on their measure, and deployed troops to organise the execution of 400 slaves affected by the law. However, he vetoed strong measures against the freedmen affected by the case.Tacitus, Annals XIV.45.
After tax collectors were accused of being too harsh to the poor, Nero transferred collection authority to lower commissioners. Nero banned any magistrate or procurator from exhibiting public entertainment for fear that the venue was being used as a method to sway the populace.Tacitus, Annals XIII.31. Additionally, there were many impeachments and removals of government officials along with arrests for extortion and corruption.Tacitus, Annals XIII.30, XIV.18, XIV.40, XIV.46.
When further complaints arose that the poor were being overly taxed, Nero attempted to repeal all indirect taxes.Tacitus, Annals XIII.50. The Senate convinced him this action would bankrupt the public treasury. As a compromise, taxes were cut from 4.5% to 2.5%.Tacitus, Annals XIII.51. Additionally, secret government tax records were ordered to become public. To lower the cost of food imports, merchant ships were declared tax-exempt.
In imitation of the Greeks, Nero built a number of gymnasiums and theatres.Tacitus, Annals XIV.20. Enormous gladiatorial shows were also held.Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 12. Nero also established the quinquennial Neronia. The festival included games, poetry, and theater. Historians indicate that there was a belief that theatre led to immorality. Others considered that to have performers dressed in Greek clothing was old fashioned.Tacitus, Annals XIV.21. Some questioned the large public expenditure on entertainment.
In 64, Rome burned.Tacitus, Annals XV.38. Nero enacted a public relief effort as well as significant reconstruction.Tacitus, Annals XV.43. A number of other major construction projects occurred in Nero's late reign. Nero had the marshes of Ostia filled with rubble from the fire. He erected the large Domus Aurea.Tacitus, Annals XV.42. In 67, Nero attempted to have a canal dug at the Isthmus of Corinth.Josephus, War of the Jews III.10.10,Werner, Walter: "The largest ship trackway in ancient times: the Diolkos of the Isthmus of Corinth, Greece, and early attempts to build a canal", The International Journal of Nautical Archaeology, Vol. 26, No. 2 (1997), pp. 98–119. Ancient historians state that these projects and others exacerbated the drain on the State's budget.Tacitus, Annals XVI.3.
The cost to rebuild Rome was immense, requiring funds the state treasury did not have. Nero devalued the Roman currency for the first time in the Empire's history. He reduced the weight of the denarius from 84 per Roman pound to 96 (3.85 grams to 3.35 grams). He also reduced the silver purity from 99.5% to 93.5%—the silver weight dropping from 3.83 grams to 3.4 grams. Furthermore, Nero reduced the weight of the aureus from 40 per Roman pound to 45 (8 grams to 7.2 grams).[tpl]cite web|url=http://www.tulane.edu/~august/handouts/601cprin.htm|title=Roman Currency of the Principate|publisher=Tulane University|date=|accessdate=2011-07-13[/tpl]
Between 62 and 67, according to Plinius the Elder and Seneca, Nero promoted an expedition to discover the sources of the Nile River. It was the first exploration of equatorial Africa from Europe in history.[tpl]Cite book|url=http://books.google.com/books?id=I2bJP8zLR_UC&pg=PA70&lpg=PA70&dq=nero+expedition+to+ethiopia&source=bl&ots=tc0NB0Oqt1&sig=ros4Zz0Ayze9-xtWGH90ULSOsUs&hl=en&ei=htBkTLvtEoP-8AaHlqXeCA&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=1&ved=0CBcQ6AEwADgK#v=onepage&q=nero%20expedition%20to%20ethiopia&f=false|title=Derek A. Welsby: Nero expedition to Nile sources|publisher=Books.google.com|date=|accessdate=2010-11-09[/tpl] However, Nero's expedition up the Nile failed because water plants had clogged the river, denying Nero's vessels access to the Sudd of present-day South Sudan.
The economic policy of Nero is a point of debate among scholars. According to ancient historians, Nero's construction projects were overly extravagant and the large number of expenditures under Nero left Italy "thoroughly exhausted by contributions of money" with "the provinces ruined."Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 31.Tacitus, Annals wikisource:The Annals (Tacitus)/Book 15#45 XV.45. Modern historians, though, note that the period was riddled with deflation and that it is likely that Nero's spending came in the form of public works projects and charity intended to ease economic troubles.Thornton, Mary Elizabeth Kelly "Nero's New Deal," Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological Association, Vol. 102, (1971), p. 629.

===Great Fire of Rome (64 AD)===

The Great Fire of Rome erupted on the night of 18 July to 19 July 64. The fire started at the southeastern end of the Circus Maximus in shops selling flammable goods.
The extent of the fire is uncertain. According to Tacitus, who was nine at the time of the fire, it spread quickly and burned for over five days.Tacitus, Annals XV.40; Suetonius says the fire raged for six days and seven nights, Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 38; A pillar set by Domitius states the fire burned for nine days. It destroyed three of fourteen Roman districts and severely damaged seven. The only other historian who lived through the period and mentioned the fire is Pliny the Elder, who wrote about it in passing.Pliny the Elder, Natural Histories, XVII.1.5, Pliny mentions trees that lasted "down to the Emperor Nero's conflagration". Other historians who lived through the period (including Josephus, Dio Chrysostom, Plutarch, and Epictetus) make no mention of it in what remains of their work.
It is uncertain who or what actually caused the fire—whether accident or arson. Suetonius and Cassius Dio favor Nero as the arsonist, so he could build a palatial complex. Tacitus mentions that Christians confessed to the crime, but it is not known whether these confessions were induced by torture.Tacitus Annals XV.44. However, accidental fires were common in ancient Rome.Juvenal writes that Rome suffered from perpetual fires and falling houses Juvenal, Satires 3.7, 3.195, 3.214. In fact, Rome suffered other large fires in 69Tacitus, Histories I.2. and in 80.Suetonius, Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Titus 8.
It was said by Suetonius and Cassius Dio that Nero sang the "Sack of Ilium" in stage costume while the city burned.Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero, 38; Cassius Dio, Roman History LXII.16. Popular legend claims that Nero played the fiddle at the time of the fire, an anachronism based merely on the concept of the lyre, a stringed instrument associated with Nero and his performances. (There were no fiddles in 1st-century Rome.) Tacitus's account, however, has Nero in Antium at the time of the fire.Tacitus, Annals XV.39. Tacitus also said that Nero playing his lyre and singing while the city burned was only rumor.
According to Tacitus, upon hearing news of the fire, Nero returned to Rome to organize a relief effort, which he paid for from his own funds. Nero's contributions to the relief extended to personally taking part in the search for and rescue of victims of the blaze, spending days searching the debris without even his bodyguards.[tpl]Citation needed|date=May 2010[/tpl] After the fire, Nero opened his palaces to provide shelter for the homeless, and arranged for food supplies to be delivered in order to prevent starvation among the survivors.
In the wake of the fire, he made a new urban development plan. Houses after the fire were spaced out, built in brick, and faced by porticos on wide roads. Nero also built a new palace complex known as the Domus Aurea in an area cleared by the fire. This included lush artificial landscapes and a 30-meter-tall statue of himself, the Colossus of Nero. The size of this complex is debated (from 100 to 300 acres).Roth, Leland M. (1993). Understanding Architecture: Its Elements, History and Meaning, First, Boulder, CO: Westview Press, pp. 227–8. ISBN 0-06-430158-3.Ball, Larry F. (2003). The Domus Aurea and the Roman architectural revolution. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-82251-3.Warden reduces its size to under [tpl]convert|100|acre|km2[/tpl]. Warden, P.G., "The Domus Aurea Reconsidered," Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 40 (1981) pp. 271–278. To find the necessary funds for the reconstruction, tributes were imposed on the provinces of the empire.Tacitus, Annals XV.45.
Tacitus, in one of the earliest non-Christian references to the origins of Christianity, notes that the population searched for a scapegoat and rumors held Nero responsible. To deflect blame, Nero targeted Christians. He ordered Christians to be thrown to dogs, while others were crucified and burned.

===Public performances===

Nero enjoyed driving a one-horse chariot, singing to the lyre, and poetry.Tacitus, Annals XIV.14, XIV.16. He even composed songs that were performed by other entertainers throughout the empire.Philostratus II, Life of Apollonius 4.39; Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Vitellius 11. At first, Nero only performed for a private audience.Tacitus, Annals XV.33.
In 64 AD., Nero began singing in public in Neapolis in order to improve his popularity. He also sang at the second quinquennial Neronia in 65.Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars Life of Nero 21. It was said that Nero craved the attention,Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 33. but historians also write that Nero was encouraged to sing and perform in public by the Senate, his inner circle and the people.Tacitus, Annals XVI.4; Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Vitellius 11; Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 10, 21. Ancient historians strongly criticize his choice to perform, calling it shameful.Tacitus, Annals XIV.15; Cassius Dio, Roman History LXI.19.
Nero was persuaded to participate in the Olympic Games of 67 in order to improve relations with Greece and display Roman dominance.Philostratus II, Life of Apollonius 5.7. As a competitor, Nero raced a ten-horse chariot and nearly died after being thrown from it.Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 24. He also performed as an actor and a singer.Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 25. Though Nero faltered in his racing (in one case, dropping out entirely before the end) and acting competitions, he won these crowns nevertheless and paraded them when he returned to Rome. The victories are attributed to Nero bribing the judges and his status as emperor.Suetonius The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 23, 24.

===War and peace with Parthia===

Shortly after Nero's accession to the throne in 54, the Roman vassal kingdom of Armenia overthrew their Iberian prince Rhadamistus and he was replaced with the Parthian prince Tiridates.Tacitus, Annals XIII.7. This was seen as a Parthian invasion of Roman territory. There was concern in Rome over how the young Emperor would handle the situation.Tacitus, Annals XIII.8. Nero reacted by immediately sending the military to the region under the command of Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo.Tacitus, Annals XIII.9. The Parthians temporarily relinquished control of Armenia to Rome.Tacitus, Annals XIII.10.
The peace did not last and full-scale war broke out in 58. The Parthian king Vologases I refused to remove his brother Tiridates from Armenia.Tacitus, Annals XIII.42. The Parthians began a full-scale invasion of the Armenian kingdom. Commander Corbulo responded and repelled most of the Parthian army that same year.Tacitus, Annals XIII.55. Tiridates retreated and Rome again controlled most of Armenia.
Nero was acclaimed in public for this initial victory.Tacitus, Annals XIII.56. Tigranes, a Cappadocian noble raised in Rome, was installed by Nero as the new ruler of Armenia.Tacitus, Annals XIV.36. Corbulo was appointed governor of Syria as a reward.
In 62, Tigranes invaded the Parthian province of Adiabene.Tacitus, Annals XV.1. Again, Rome and Parthia were at war and this continued until 63. Parthia began building up for a strike against the Roman province of Syria.Tacitus, Annals XV.4. Corbulo tried to convince Nero to continue the war, but Nero opted for a peace deal instead.Tacitus, Annals XV.16. There was anxiety in Rome about eastern grain supplies and a budget deficit.Tacitus, Annals XV.18.
The result was a deal where Tiridates again became the Armenian king, but was crowned in Rome by Emperor Nero.Tacitus, Annals XV.29. In the future, the king of Armenia was to be a Parthian prince, but his appointment required approval from the Romans. Tiridates was forced to come to Rome and partake in ceremonies meant to display Roman dominance.Cassius Dio, Roman History LXIII.2.
This peace deal of 63 was a considerable victory for Nero politically.Cassius Dio, Roman History LXII.23. Nero became very popular in the eastern provinces of Rome and with the Parthians as well. The peace between Parthia and Rome lasted 50 years until Emperor Trajan of Rome invaded Armenia in 114.

===Other major power struggles and rebellions===

The war with Parthia was not Nero's only major war but he was both criticized and praised for an aversion to battle.Suetonius Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Nero 18; Marcus Annaeus Lucanus Pharsalia (Civil War) (c. 65)http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/etext96/pcwar10.txt. Like many emperors, Nero faced a number of rebellions and power struggles within the empire.
In 60, a major rebellion broke out in the province of Britannia.Tacitus, Annals XIV.29. While the governor Gaius Suetonius Paullinus and his troops were busy capturing the island of Mona (Anglesey) from the druids, the tribes of the southeast staged a revolt led by queen Boudica of the Iceni.Tacitus, Annals XIV.31. Boudica and her troops destroyed three cities before the army of Paullinus could return, receive reinforcements, and quell the rebellion in 61.Tacitus, Annals XIV.31–38. Fearing Paullinus himself would provoke further rebellion, Nero replaced him with the more passive Publius Petronius Turpilianus.Tacitus, Annals XIV.39.
In 65, Gaius Calpurnius Piso, a Roman statesman, organized a conspiracy against Nero with the help of Subrius Flavus and Sulpicius Asper, a tribune and a centurion of the Praetorian Guard.Tacitus, Annals XV.49. According to Tacitus, many conspirators wished to "rescue the state" from the emperor and restore the Republic.Tacitus, Annals XV.50. The freedman Milichus discovered the conspiracy and reported it to Nero's secretary, Epaphroditos.Tacitus, Annals XV.55. As a result, the conspiracy failed and its members were executed including Lucan, the poet.Tacitus, Annals XV.70. Nero's previous advisor, Seneca was ordered to commit suicide after admitting he discussed the plot with the conspirators.Tacitus, Annals XV.60–62.
In 66, there was a Jewish revolt in Judea stemming from Greek and Jewish religious tension.Josephus, War of the Jews II.13.7. In 67, Nero dispatched Vespasian to restore order.Josephus, War of the Jews III.1.3. This revolt was eventually put down in 70, after Nero's death.Josephus, War of the Jews VI.10.1. This revolt is famous for Romans breaching the walls of Jerusalem and destroying the Second Temple of Jerusalem.Josephus, War of the Jews VII.1.1.

===The revolt of Vindex and Galba and the death of Nero===

