[[Nuremberg Charter]]

CATEGORIES: Human rights abuses, International humanitarian law treaties, War crimes, International criminal law treaties, Politics of World War II, 1945 in law, Crimes against humanity, Crime of aggression, International Military Tribunal in Nuremberg, World War II treaties, Treaties concluded in 1945, 1945 in international relations, Treaties entered into force in 1945, 1945 in London, Treaties of Argentina, Treaties of Belgium, Treaties of Czechoslovakia, Treaties of Denmark, Treaties of the Ethiopian Empire, Treaties of the Provisional Government of the French Republic, Treaties of the Kingdom of Greece, Treaties of Haiti, Treaties of Honduras, Treaties of British India, Treaties of Luxembourg, Treaties of the Netherlands, Treaties of New Zealand, Treaties of Norway, Treaties of Panama, Treaties of Paraguay, Treaties of the Polish People's Republic, Treaties of the Soviet Union, Treaties of the United Kingdom, Treaties of the United States, Treaties of Uruguay, Treaties of Venezuela, Treaties of Yugoslavia, Treaties establishing intergovernmental organizations

The Charter of the International Military Tribunal – Annex to the Agreement for the prosecution and punishment of the major war criminals of the European Axis (usually referred to as the Nuremberg Charter or London Charter) was the decree issued on 8 August 1945 that set down the laws and procedures by which the Nuremberg trials were to be conducted.
The charter stipulated that crimes of the European  Axis Powers could be tried. Three categories of crimes were defined: crimes against peace, war crimes, and crimes against humanity. Article 8 of the charter also stated that holding an official position was no defense to war crimes. Obedience to orders could only be considered in mitigation of punishment if the Tribunal determined that justice so required.
The criminal procedure used by the Tribunal was closer to civil law than to common law, with a trial before a panel of judges rather than a jury trial and with wide allowance for hearsay evidence. Defendants who were found guilty could appeal the verdict to the Allied Control Council. In addition, they would be permitted to present evidence in their defense and to cross-examine witnesses. 
The Charter was developed under the authority of the Moscow Declaration: Statement on Atrocities, which was agreed at the Moscow Conference (1943). It was drawn up in London, following the surrender of Germany on VE Day. It was drafted by Robert H. Jackson, Robert Falco, and Iona Nikitchenko of the European Advisory Commission, and issued on August 8, 1945.Charter of the International Military Tribunal - Annex to the Agreement for the prosecution and punishment of the major war criminals of the European Axis. United Nations Refugee Agency
The Charter and its definition of crimes against peace was also the basis of the Finnish law, approved by the Finnish parliament on 11 September 1945, that enabled the war-responsibility trials in Finland.
The Agreement for the prosecution and punishment of the major war criminals of the European Axis and the annexed Charter were formally signed by France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States on 8 August 1945. The Agreement and Charter were subsequently ratified by 19 other Allied states.Ratifications.

==See also==

==References==

 

==External links==


