[[WCKX]]

CATEGORIES: Radio One stations, Radio stations in Columbus, Ohio, Rhythmic contemporary radio stations in the United States, Radio stations established in 1993, 1993 establishments in Ohio

WCKX (107.5 FM, "Power 107.5") is a radio station broadcasting an Rhythmic contemporary format with a heavy but hit-driven emphasis on current R&B/Hip-Hop product.  The station is licensed to and serves the Columbus, Ohio metropolitan area.  It first began broadcasting in 1993 under the call sign WJZA.  The station is currently owned by Radio One, and highly influenced by the BlackPlanet social networking site. The station serves as the sister station to WXMG.  Its studios are located just north of downtown, but the transmitter is located in downtown atop Columbus Center.

==Station History==

WCKX was originally assigned the 'WJZA' call sign on November 23, 1993. On December 29, 1997, the WCKX call sign assigned to 106.3 MHz ("Power 106") in London, Ohio (now WJYD) was reassigned to 107.5 FM, while the WJZA call sign was dropped and later picked up by 103.5 FM in Pickerington ("Smooth Jazz 103.5 FM").
In December 2007, WCKX began to tilt its urban format direction towards Rhythmic contemporary, according to Mediabase, and by September 2009 was officially moved from the R&B/Hip-Hop panel to the Rhythmic Airplay Panel by Nielsen BDSBDS monitored radio panel update as it began to incorporate more Rhythmic Pop tracks into its playlist, possibly to become more competitive with Top 40/CHR rival WNCI because of the latter's conservative heritage and its Adult-leaning direction. This shift to Rhythmic has also helped WCKX overtake WNCI in the Columbus Arbitrons, and at times taking the top spot in the market's rating books. Although during its early days as  a Urban, WCKX had always leaned towards a Rhythmic direction.  Officially, it is the first Radio One-owned station (along with Dallas/Fort Worth's KBFB, Philadelphia's WPHI-FM, which has changed to urban contemporary in 2011 & Indianapolis' WHHH) to be a rhythmic since the sale of former sister station WDHT in Dayton, OH and KTWN-FM in Minneapolis.
Despite the success it has with the Rhythmic format, WCKX is at times criticized for not playing enough Hip-Hop/R&B product, especially those from the local scene,From Radio-Info Columbus Message board but at the same time does have its supporters and listeners who like their musical mix and DJs."Hip-hop on top: Ratings leader WCKX blends entertainment and empowerment" from Columbus Dispatch (August 28, 2007)

==References==

==External links==


