[[Streetsville Secondary School]]

CATEGORIES: Peel District School Board, High schools in Mississauga, Educational institutions established in 1958

Streetsville Secondary School is a high school in the Peel District School Board located in the Streetsville community of Mississauga, Ontario, Canada.
Streetsville Secondary School was opened in 1958. The school has 899 students, and of the 899, 325 are French Immersion. As of December 2013, twenty one students are bused in.
The school features a main floor and a second floor on its north side. It has two gymnasiums, one large in size, and the second being half the size of the first. When the school first opened, the smaller gym was originally intended to be a swimming pool. The school has a library, which was recently renovated and expanded, and a cafeteria.
The school has several unusual classes including Grade 11 and 12 Photographic Arts, the unusual aspect being the darkroom available for student use, one of the last remaining in the Peel school system. Also available to students is Music Production, a course teaching the recording and mastering of music using computers. 
In 2005, the French immersion programme for students was introduced at Streetsville Secondary School where students can learn bilingualism in Canada. The courses offered are: French Immersion (Grades 9-12), Science and Geography of Canada (Grade 9), Contemporary Canadian History, Career Studies, and Civics (Grade 10), World History to the 16th Century (Grade 11), and Canadian and World Issues: A Geographic Analysis (Grade 12).
Up until summer of 2005, the school had 13 portable buildings. However, in 2005, Mississauga Secondary School opened in the area and about half of the grade 9 and 10 students attending Streetsville had to switch schools due to boundary changes. This dropped the overall attendance by about 500, and all of the portables have been removed (not including the permanent portapac attached to the building). The sole portable remaining was used as an extension of the school's drama room until it was removed in 2006 due to budget cuts.

==Streetsville Alumni Association==

Established in 1978 for the school's 20th anniversary, the association held a 40th anniversary celebration in 1998. A 50th anniversary celebration and reunion was held on June 6 and 7, 2008 at the school, along with the Streetsville Bread and Honey Festival.
A Streetsville Secondary School Reunion group http://groups.google.com/group/StreetsvilleSS_reunion has been set up on Google to get the latest information about the 50th anniversary celebration in 2008 as well as to reconnect with alumni.
Noted alumni include Morag Smith, a television comedian.

==Sports==

Streetsville Secondary School offers many athletic opportunities, including: Rugby, Basketball, Volleyball, Track and Field, Swimming, Badminton, Flag Football and 7's Rugby .  Streetsville recently won Senior Boys ROPSSAA (Region of Peel Secondary Schools Athletic Association) Gold Medal in Rugby, as well as an OFSAA Gold Medal, finishing their 2012 season with 32 wins and 0 loses. The school also has an Archery team that does exceptionally well each year winning many Olympic class Gold, Silver and Bronze Medals in ROPSSAA and OFSSAA.

==See also==

==External links==


