[[Exidy]]

CATEGORIES: Exidy games, Defunct video game companies, Companies based in Sunnyvale, California, Technology companies based in the San Francisco Bay Area

Exidy was one of the largest creators of arcade video games during the early period of video games, from 1974 until at least 1986 (when Chiller was released http://www.klov.com/game_detail.php?game_id=7328). The company was founded by H.R. "Pete" Kauffman. The name "Exidy" was a portmanteau of the words "Excellence in Dynamics."
Some of the notable games released by Exidy included Circus, Death Race, Star Fire, Venture, Pepper II,  Mouse Trap, Victory, Targ, and Spectar. Star Fire appeared in the 1980 film Midnight Madness, while Mouse Trap was the subject of a song on the 1982 Pac-Man Fever album. Also produced but never given as wide a release was the ultra rare puzzle game Hard Hat, the completed but unreleased Kreeper Krawlers, and the prototype of rather mysterious origins Teeter Torture.

==Company history==

Beginning in 1983, Exidy released a series of light gun games, the first and most well known of which was Crossbow. These presented an unusual twist to the genre: the goal is to protect characters walking through the screen by shooting down bullets and other things which are trying to kill the characters. These games were also the first to feature fully digitized sound for all sound effects and music (more advanced than other games up until the 16-bit generation). Other "C" series games include Cheyenne, Combat, Crackshot, Clay Pigeon, and Chiller. Chief designer for these games was Larry Hutcherson.James Hague, "The Giant List of Classic Game Programmers: Hutcherson, Larry W. Sr.", 24 January 2010 Exidy also made two rarely seen motion cabinet games with vector graphics called Vertigo and Top Gunner.  Chief game designer for this game was Vic Tolomei.
Another somewhat successful game from Exidy was a driving game named Top Secret.  This game featured a spy car with advanced weaponry on a mission inside the Soviet Union to destroy a heavily guarded Top Secret super weapon. Game designers for this game were Vic Tolomei, Larry Hutcherson and Ken Nicholson.
One of Exidy's efforts aimed at trivia lovers during the 1980s was the quiz game Fax, a multi-level game housed in a large wooden cabinet that stood about 4 feet high and looked nothing like other video games of the time period.  Much like the 2000s hit game show, Who Wants To Be A Millionaire, players were shown a series of questions with four possible answers.  A point value "clock" ran down to zero after answers were shown, meaning players answering quicker earned more points for their correct answers. (Incorrect answers incurred no penalty.)Flippers Web Site image of FAX game
Under the leadership of visionary Paul Terrell of Byte Shop fame, Exidy made a brief foray into the personal computer market, with the Exidy Sorcerer in 1978. The Sorcerer was a modified S-100 bus based machine, but lacked the internal expansion system common to other S-100 systems. It made do with an S-100 expansion card-edge that could connect to an external S-100 expansion cage. The Sorcerer also featured an advanced (for the era) text display that was capable of 64 characters per line, when most systems supported only 40 characters. The Sorcerer did not support sound, color, or in some respects, graphics, which seems at odds with the company's video game background; however the characters it displayed were programmable by the user. The system was never very popular in North America, but found a following in Australia and Europe, notably Belgium.Obsolete Technology Website Exidy licensed the Sorcerer computer and its software to a Texas-based startup called Dynasty Computer Corporation in 1979.  It was relabeled and sold by Dynasty as the Dynasty Smart-Alec.
In 2006 it was announced that Mean Hamster Software acquired rights to develop new Exidy arcade games.Mean Hamster Software
In 2007, the MAME website announcedMAME | Multiple Arcade machine Emulator "New ROMs and Wiki Content", February 27, 2007, accessed June 15, 2011. that H.R. Kaufmann had released the first of what would become a sizable group of Exidy games downloadable for free, non-commercial use, adding Circus to the already-released Teeter Torture.  By 2011, with the help of Reinhard Stompe, the listMAME | Star Fire (Exidy, 1979) Undated; images last modified October 26, 2010, accessed June 15, 2011. of ROM images included Circus, Robot Bowl, Car Polo, Side Trak, Ripcord, Fire One, Crash, Star Fire and its unreleased upgrade Star Fire II, Targ, Spectar, Hard Hat, Victory, Teeter Torture, Fax, and Top Gunner.  The ROM images were cleared only for non-commercial use and may be downloaded from the MAME website after the user acknowledges the terms of usage.MAME | Multiple Arcade machine Emulator "New Free ROMs Posted", January 25, 2011, accessed June 15, 2011.

==Arcade titles==

==References==

==External links==


