    ... those who find themselves in hell will be chastised by the scourge of love. How cruel and bitter this torment of love will be! For those who understand that they have sinned against love, undergo no greater suffering than those produced by the most fearful tortures. The sorrow which takes hold of the heart, which has sinned against love, is more piercing than any other pain. It is not right to say that the sinners in hell are deprived of the love of God ... But love acts in two ways, as suffering of the reproved, and as joy in the blessed! (St. Isaac of Syria, Mystic Treatises) The Orthodox Church of America website [http://www.oca.org/OCchapter.asp?SID=2&ID=208]</ref> Theories explicitly identifying Hell with an experience of the divine light may go back as far as [[Theophanes the Branded|Theophanes of Nicea]]. According to Iōannēs Polemēs, Theophanes believed that, for sinners, "the divine light will be perceived as the punishing fire of hell".<ref>Iōannēs Polemēs, ''Theophanes of Nicaea:
His Life and Works'', vol. 20 (Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1996), p. 99[/ref]
However, according to Iōannēs Polemēs, the important Orthodox theologian Gregory Palamas did not believe that sinners would experience the divine light: "Unlike Theophanes, Palamas did not believe that sinners could have an experience of the divine light ... Nowhere in his works does Palamas seem to adopt Theophanes' view that the light of Tabor is identical with the fire of hell."[ref]Iōannēs Polemēs,''Theophanes of Nicaea:
His Life and Works'', vol. 20 (Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1996), p. 100[/ref]
Some Eastern Orthodox express personal opinions that appear to run counter to these statements, in teaching hell is separation from God.Archimandrite Sophrony (Sakharov) speaks of "the hell of separation from God" (Archimandrite Sophrony, The Monk of Mount Athos: Staretz Silouan, 1866-1938 (St Vladimir's Seminary Press 2001 ISBN 0-913836-15-X), p. 32)."The circumstances that rise before us, the problems we encounter, the relationships we form, the choices we make, all ultimately concern our eternal union with or separation from God" (Life Transfigured: A Journal of Orthodox Nuns, Vol. 24, No. 2, Summer 1991, pp.8-9, produced by The Orthodox Monastery of the Transfiguration, Ellwood City, Pa.)."Hell is nothing else but separation of man from God, his autonomy excluding him from the place where God is present" (In the World, of the Church: A Paul Evdokimov Reader (St Vladimir's Seminary Press 2001 ISBN 0-88141-215-5), p. 32)."Hell is a spiritual state of separation from God and inability to experience the love of God, while being conscious of the ultimate deprivation of it as punishment" (Father Theodore Stylianopoulos)."Hell is none other than the state of separation from God, a condition into which humanity was plunged for having preferred the creature to the Creator. It is the human creature, therefore, and not God, who engenders hell. Created free for the sake of love, man possesses the incredible power to reject this love, to say 'no' to God. By refusing communion with God, he becomes a predator, condemning himself to a spiritual death (hell) more dreadful than the physical death that derives from it"  (Michel Quenot, The Resurrection and the Icon (St. Vladimir’s Seminary Press 1997 ISBN 0-88141-149-3), p. 85).
Pictures of heaven and hell presented in Western literature are sometimes the work of authors hostile to the Catholic Church and its teaching. Both John MiltonJohn N. King, Milton and Religious Controversy (Cambridge University Press 2000 ISBN 978-0-52177198-6), p. 1 and James Joyce rejected Roman Catholic teaching, and even Dante has been seen by some writers, including Joyce, as anti-Catholic.Derek Attridge (editor), ''The Cambridge Companion to James Joyce" (Cambridge University Press 1990 ISBN 978-0-52137673-0), p. 57 It is Roman Catholic teaching that God loves all, even those who choose against him, such as the devil.Catholic Answers, "If God loves all his creatures, then doesn't he love Satan?" And again, the understanding of the problem of universals that prevails in the West is that of Aristotelian realism, which understands universals as existing only in the things that instance them, not in God.
In the West, heaven is spoken of as the beatific vision: those to whom God reveals himself in heaven "see him face to face"[tpl]bibleverse|1|Corinthians|13:12|ESV[/tpl]; cf. [tpl]bibleverse||Matthew|5:8|ESV[/tpl]; [tpl]bibleverse||Psalms|17:15|ESV[/tpl][tpl]cite web|url = http://www.lcms.org/pages/internal.asp?NavID=6948| title = God in Heaven|publisher = Lutheran Church Missouri Synod|accessdate = 2007-10-31[/tpl] The Catholic Encyclopedia defines the beatific vision as "the immediate knowledge of God which the angelic spirits and the souls of the just enjoy in Heaven. It is called 'vision' to distinguish it from the mediate knowledge of God which the human mind may attain in the present life. And since in beholding God face to face the created intelligence finds perfect happiness, the vision is termed 'beatific'."Edward Pace, "Beatific Vision" in "Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 2. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907 This direct vision of God is possible, as defined by the Council of Vienne of 1311-1312 only by a  divine illumination that theologians call the light of glory (lumen gloriae).Jordan Aumann, Spiritual Theology (Continuum 1980 ISBN 978-0-56700505-2), p. 43
In the Roman Catholic Church, "various theologians and mystics have noted that the 'fire' of Hell is the divine light and burning love of God. While the fire of God's divine love animates those who receive it, it torments those who reject it. Or, as the Catechism states, 'Hell's principal punishment consists of eternal separation from God in whom alone man can have the life and happiness for which he was created and for which he longs' (CCC 1057)."Catholicism Answers, "Lesson Ten: The Last Things" The Catholic Church believes that God's love extends to all, even to those who reject his love definitively.The Reality of HellCord Hamrick, "For God So Loved the World, He Created Hell" in Crisis Magazine (9 May 2011)Gustav Niebuhr, "Hell Is Getting A Makeover From Catholics" in New York Times, 18 September 1999
"Concerning the detailed specific nature of hell ... the Catholic Church has defined nothing. ... It is useless to speculate about its true nature, and more sensible to confess our ignorance in a question that evidently exceeds human understanding. "John Anthony O'Brien, The Faith of Millions: The Credentials of the Catholic Religion, pp. 19-20

==Roman Catholic Church==

In the Catholic Church, terms derived from Latin contemplatio, such as the English word "contemplation", are generally used in languages that are largely derived from Latin, rather than the Greek term theoria. The equivalence of the Latin and Greek termsCf. Josef Pieper, An Anthology (Ignatius Press 1989 ISBN 978-0-89870226-2), 43; Eugene Victor Walter, Placeways (UNC Press Books 1988 ISBN 978-0-80784200-3), p. 218; Thomas Hibbs, Aquinas, Ethics and Philosophy of Religion (Indiana University Press 2007 ISBN 978-0-25311676-5), pp. 8, 89; Steven Chase, Angelic Spirituality (Paulist Press 2002 ISBN 978-0-80913948-4), p. 63 was noted by John Cassian, whose writings influenced the whole of Western monasticism,Encyclopaedia Britannica, Saint John Cassian in his Conferences.John Cassian, The Conferences (English translation by Boniface Ramsey, Newman Press 1997 ISBN 978-0-80910484-0), p. 47 However, Catholic writers do sometimes use the Greek term.Christopher A. Dustin, "The Liturgy of Theory" in Bruce T. Morrill et al. (editors), Practicing Catholic (Palgrave Macmillan 2005 ISBN 978-1-40398296-4), pp. 257-274; Thomas Bénatouïl, Mauro Bonazzi, Theoria, Praxis, and the Contemplative Life after Plato and Aristotle (Brill 2012 ISBN 978-9-00422532-9); Frans Jozef van Beeck, God Encountered: A Contemporary Catholic Systematic Theology (Liturgical Press 2001 ISBN 978-0-81465877-2); and in books dealing with Antiochene exegesis

===Possibility of contemplation===

According to Saint Gregory the Great there are people by whom, "while still living in this corruptible flesh, yet growing in incalculable power by a certain piercingness of contemplation, the Eternal Brightness is able to be seen."Gregory the Great, Moralia, book 18, 89 
While the direct vision of God (the Beatific Vision) can be reached only in the next life, God does give to some a very special grace, by which he becomes intimately present to the created mind even before death, enabling it to contemplate him with ineffable joy and be mystically united with him even while still alive, true mystical contemplation.George M. Sauvage, "Mysticism" in Catholic Encyclopedia Saint Augustine said that, in contemplation, man meets God face-to-face."Orthodox Prayer life'', p. 60
[tpl]Quote|Inasmuch as the goal of the Christian life is the vision of God in heaven, Augustine and others maintain that the "contemplative life" is the eschatological goal of all Christians, the fruit and reward of the entire Christian life. "Contemplation" on earth can thus be seen as a foretaste of heaven.[/tpl] Contemplative prayer is not the reserve of some elite: "rather it is that interior intimacy with God which is intended for all baptized people, to which Jesus wants to lead all his disciples, because it is his own intimacy with the Father".Cardinal Christoph von Schonborn, Living the Catechism of the Catholic Church: Paths of Prayer (Ignatius Press 2003 ISBN 9780898709568), chapter 30
The Catechism of the Catholic Church describes contemplation as "a gaze of faith, fixed on Jesus. 'I look at him and he looks at me': this is what a certain peasant of Ars used to say to his holy curé about his prayer before the tabernacle. This focus on Jesus is a renunciation of self. His gaze purifies our heart; the light of the countenance of Jesus illumines the eyes of our heart and teaches us to see everything in the light of his truth and his compassion for all men. Contemplation also turns its gaze on the mysteries of the life of Christ. Thus it learns the 'interior knowledge of our Lord', the more to love him and follow him."Catechism of the Catholic Church, 2715
Contemplative prayer is "a communion in which the Holy Trinity conforms man, the image of God, 'to his likeness'" and in it "the Father strengthens our inner being with power through his Spirit 'that Christ may dwell in (our) hearts through faith' and we may be 'grounded in love' ([tpl]bibleverse||Ephesians|3:16-17|ESV[/tpl])."Catechism of the Catholic Church, 2713-2714
Saint John Cassian the Roman, whose writings influenced the whole of Western monasticism,Encyclopaedia Britannica, Saint John Cassian interpreted the Gospel episode of Martha and Mary as indicating that Jesus declared "the chief good to reside in theoria alone – that is, in divine contemplation", which is initiated by reflecting on a few holy persons and advances to being fed on the beauty and knowledge of God alone.John Cassian, Conferences, I, chapter 8, translation by Boniface Ramsey
Saint Augustine has been cited as proving magnificently that man can only find God in the depths of his own soul: "Too late loved I Thee, O Beauty so old, yet ever new! Too late loved I Thee. And behold, Thou wert within, and I abroad, and there I searched for Thee. Thou wert with me, but I was not with Thee."Orthodox Prayer Life, p. 61 The Dismissal Hymn sung in the Byzantine Rite feast of Saint Augustine, 15 June, describes him as "a wise hierarch who has received God":
He is celebrated not only as a contemplative but also as a theologian and Father of the Church, a title given to him in a document of the Fifth Ecumenical Council, held in Constantinople in 553, which declared that it followed his teaching on the true faith "in every way"."We further declare that we hold fast to the decrees of the four Councils, and in every way follow the holy Fathers, Athanasius, Hilary, Basil, Gregory the Theologian, Gregory of Nyssa, Ambrose, Theophilus, John (Chrysostom) of Constantinople, Cyril, Augustine, Proclus, Leo and their writings on the true faith" (Extracts from the Acts. Session I).  Another document of the same ecumenical council speaks of Augustine as "of most religious memory, who shone forth resplendent among the African bishops".The Sentence of the Synod
Contemplation may sometimes reach a level that has been described as religious ecstasy, and non-essential phenomena, such as visions and stigmata, may sometimes though very rarely accompany it.

===Contemplation and rational knowledge===

The writings attributed to Saint Dionysius the Areopagite were highly influential in the West, and their theses and arguments were adopted by Peter Lombard, Alexander of Hales, Saint Albert the Great, Saint Thomas Aquinas and Saint Bonaventure.Joseph Stiglmayr, "Dionysius the Pseudo-Areopagite" in Catholic Encyclopedia According to these writings, mystical knowledge must be distinguished from the rational knowledge by which we know God, not in his nature, but through the wonderful order of the universe, which is a participation in the divine ideas. Through the more perfect mystical knowledge of God, a knowledge beyond the attainments of reason (even when enlightened by faith), the soul contemplates directly the mysteries of divine light.
Theoria or contemplation of God is of far higher value than reasoning about God or speculative theology,Merton 2003, p. 2 its illumination prized much more than the intellectual capacity of a theologian.Thomas Merton, New Seeds of Contemplation (Shambhala 2003 ISBN 978-1-59030-049-7), p. 258 "Prayer cannot be reduced to the level of a means to improved understanding".  Instead, contemplation is "the normal perfection of theology".
The rational exposition and explanation of Christian doctrine is the humbler task of the theologian, while the experience of contemplatives is often of a more lofty level, beyond the power of human words to express,Merton, 2003, p. 13 so that "they have had to resort to metaphors, similes, and symbols to convey the inexpressible."
Theology indeed can only focus on what God is not, for instance considering God a spirit by removing from our conception anything pertaining to the body, while mysticism, instead of trying to comprehend what God is, is able to intuit it.
===Practice=== 
The soul has three states, or stages, of perfection: the purgative way (that of cleansing or purification, katharsis in Greek), the illuminative way (receiving divine light) and the unitive way (indwelling in God).Arthur Devine, "State or Way" in Catholic Encyclopedia In the advance to contemplation Augustine spoke of seven stages: the first three are merely natural preliminary stages, corresponding to the vegetative, sensitive and rational levels of human life; the fourth stage is that of virtue or purification; the fifth is that of the tranquillity attained by control of the passions; the sixth is entrance into the divine light (the illuminative stage); the seventh is the indwelling or unitive stage that is truly mystical contemplation.Jordan Aumann, Christian Spirituality in the Catholic Tradition (Ignatius Press 1985 ISBN 978-0-89870068-8), p. 64
Methods of prayer include recitation of the Jesus Prayer, which "combines the Christological hymn of [tpl]bibleverse||Philippians|2:6-11|ESV[/tpl] with the cry of the publican ([tpl]bibleverse||Luke|18:13|ESV[/tpl]) and the blind man begging for light ([tpl]bibleverse||Mark|10:46-52|ESV[/tpl]). By it the heart is opened to human wretchedness and the Saviour's mercy";Catechism of the Catholic Church, 2667 invocation of the holy name of Jesus;Catechism of the Catholic Church, 2668 recitation, as recommended by Saint John Cassian, of "O God, come to my assistance; O Lord, make haste to help me" or other verses of Scripture; repetition of a single monosyllabic word, as suggested by the Cloud of Unknowing; the method used in Centering Prayer; the use of Lectio Divina; etc.Thomas Keating, Centering Prayer and the Christian Contemplative Tradition (Monastic Interreligious Dialogue, Bulletin 40, January 1991)
The Catholic Church holds that, "in the communion of saints, many and varied spiritualities have been developed throughout the history of the Churches … The different schools of Christian spirituality share in the living tradition of prayer and are essential guides for the faithful. In their rich diversity they are refractions of the one pure light of the Holy Spirit."Catechism of the Catholic Church, 2684

==Scientific research==

Fifteen Carmelite nuns allowed scientists to scan their brains with fMRI while they were meditating, in a state known as Unio Mystica or Theoria.[ref]
