[[Cadre Noir]]

CATEGORIES: Dressage schools and teams, Maine-et-Loire, 1828 establishments in France

The Cadre Noir is the French military riding academy (the École nationale d'équitation) and an equestrian display team based in the city of Saumur in western France. This military troop was founded in 1828, and gets its name from the black uniforms that are still used today. It is one of the most prestigious horsemanship schools in the world.

==History==

The historic role of the Saumur School of Cavalry was to provide training for the officers and non-commissioned officers of the French cavalry. The equitation on which the school is built was taught by François Robichon de La Guérinière, the French riding master to King Louis XV and author of the book École de Cavalerie, which was published in 1731. In 1843, François Baucher introduces his method in the school. This event is the beginning of a small "war" between the vicomte d'Aure (head of the school) and Baucher, which continued during years.
After World War II the mounted element of the French Army had been reduced to a few squadrons of spahis (disbanded in 1962) and the primarily ceremonial Cavalry of the Republican Guard. While the need for a purely military riding academy had almost vanished, the international prestige of French horsemanship ensured the survival of the Saumur training centre in the form of a national riding school under the Ministry of Sports.
Accordingly in 1972, the National School of Équitation was constituted around the Cadre Noir, which form its core teaching staff.  Today, there are about 50 horses and a team of elite riders, usually limited to 22. The members of the Cadre Noir have either civilian or military status. Some of the riders have reached the highest level of international sport, being Olympic or world champions.
The Cadre Noir mainly uses Thoroughbreds, Anglo-Arabians, Hanoverians and Selle Français, but also keeps Lusitano horses to demonstrate the 16th and 17th century baroque style of riding. The Thoroughbreds and Anglo Arabians are used for the Grand Prix dressage, and perform individually, pas de deux (two horses), pas de trois (three horses), and dûe quantité (four or more horses). They may be either displayed in hand or ridden.

File:Didier Courreges dsc03627.jpg|Olympic champion Didier Courrèges
File:Cadre noir - reprise de manege 1.jpg|Cadre Noir in gala uniform
File:Cadre noir - croupade à la main.jpg|Croupade
File:Cadre noir - cabriole à la main.jpg|Cabriole
File:Cadre noir 19 mai 2012 (7-503).jpg|Jumping display over a single upright pole
File:Cadre noir - saut d'obstacle.jpg|Longeing demonstration over fences

The Selle Français are used to display the 'airs above the ground.'

==Bibliography==

==External links==


