[[Craig Brown (satirist)]]

CATEGORIES: 1957 births, English humorists, English satirists, Living people, People educated at Eton College, Private Eye contributors, Alumni of the University of Bristol, The Times people, The Sunday Times people, The Guardian journalists, English comedy writers

Craig Edward Moncrieff Brown (born 23 May 1957) is an English critic and satirist, best known for his work in Private Eye.

==Life and career==

Born in Wokingham,Wokingham, me and a big day out with Spock  http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-2211381/Wokingham-big-day-Spock.html Berkshire, Brown was educated at Eton and Bristol University and then became a freelance journalist in London, contributing to The Tatler, The Spectator, The Times Literary Supplement, Literary Review, the Evening Standard (as a regular columnist), The Times (notably as parliamentary sketchwriter; these columns were compiled into a book called A Life Inside) and The Sunday Times (as TV and restaurant critic). He later continued his restaurant column in The Sunday Telegraph and has contributed a weekly book review to The Mail on Sunday.
He created the characters of Bel Littlejohn, an ultra-trendy New Labour type, in The Guardian, and Wallace Arnold, an extremely reactionary conservative, in The Independent on Sunday. In 2001, he took over Auberon Waugh's "Way of the World" in The Daily Telegraph following Waugh's death. He lost that column in December 2008.  However, he is probably best known for his Diary in the fortnightly satirical magazine Private Eye, in which he adopts the persona of a celebrity or other public figure. His targets have included the Queen, Jackie Collins, Bill Clinton, Martin Amis, Harold Pinter (numerous times) and the publicist Max Clifford. A typical reference, characteristically combining viciousness and honesty, came in the purported entry for Mary Archer, married to convicted perjurer Jeffrey Archer: "I am the chairman of the Ethics Committee at Addenbrookes Hospital, and well used to coming down hard on those who lie incompetently." Another typical Eye Diary mocks Martin Amis's pretensions: "Why, pray, is it necessary to point out at this post-millennial juncture that Iosef Stalin is no mate of this 52-year-old novelist? Why, indeed?"
Brown also writes comedy shows such as Norman Ormal for TV (in which he appeared as a returning officerCraig Brown (II)), and his radio show This Is Craig Brown was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in 2004. It featured comics Rory Bremner and Harry Enfield and other media personalities. He has appeared on television as a critic on BBC2's Late Review as well as in documentaries such a Russell Davies's life of Ronald Searle.
His book 1966 and All That takes its title, and some other elements, from 1066 and All That, extending its history of Britain through to the beginning of the 21st century. A BBC Radio 4 adaptation followed in September 2006, in similar vein to This Is Craig Brown. The Tony Years is a comic overview of the years of Tony Blair's government, published in paperback by Ebury Press in June 2007.
Brown's wife's niece is Florence Welch of Florence and the Machine.Florence and the Machine interview: sound and vision The Telegraph 4 June, 2009 Brown also has a column in the Daily Mail.

==Bibliography==

==References==

==External links==


