[[Joseph LaMotta]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 births, 1998 deaths, Accidental deaths in Nova Scotia, American chefs, American boxers of Italian descent, Victims of aviation accidents or incidents in Canada

Joseph LaMotta (c. October 11, 1948 – September 2, 1998) was the son of former middleweight boxing champion Jake LaMotta and his second wife Vikki LaMotta.
Like his father, Joseph LaMotta took up boxing, going so far as to compete on the amateur boxing circuit. He entered some Golden Gloves competitions.
Joe LaMotta was a Fhsaa State HS Wrestling State Champion while wrestling for Miami Norland Sr high school in 1966 and 
He and his team  were State champions his Jr. year in HS. In 1967 he and his team mates both finished 2nd to the Dwight Witty Coached Miami  Coral  Park HS. Where Coral Park defeated Norland  in the sold out dual meet with people looking in from the roof, but something that anyone who was there will always remember during the 115 pound weight class that even the official and wrestlers stopped to see what was the commotion. It was the beautiful and sexy dressed Vicky LaMotta making her entrance into the gym. Joe got upset by Louis Wallen, that night. He also  was  unable to defend his individual State title at 167 pounds  during the 1967 FHSAA State finals he was beaten by the famous Doc Blanchards son Paul Blanchard. I know this all to be true  1st hand As I was in the Gym on Coach Witty's Coral Park Rams State Wrestling team..
Joe LaMotta was convicted of trafficking cocaine, for which he served half of his five-year sentence.Novelguide.com 
Joe LaMotta was the president of LaMotta Foods, Inc. His last creation was a product called LaMotta Tomatta Sauce.
Joseph LaMotta died at the age of 49 aboard Swissair Flight 111 when it crashed into the Atlantic Ocean off the coastal town of Peggys Cove, Nova Scotia. He was headed to Geneva to promote LaMotta Tomatta Sauce. His father filed suit against Swissair and Boeing, which a year earlier had acquired McDonnell Douglas, the manufacturer of the MD-11 aircraft that crashed.

==References==


