[[A Journey in Other Worlds]]

CATEGORIES: 1894 novels, 1890s science fiction novels, American science fiction novels, Jupiter in fiction, Saturn in fiction, 2000 in fiction, D. Appleton & Company books

A Journey in Other Worlds: A Romance of the Future is a science fiction novel by John Jacob Astor IV, published in 1894.Jean Pfaelzer, The Utopian Novel in America 1886–1896: The Politics of Form, Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh Press, 1984; pp. 108-11. ISBN 0-8229-5413-3
The book offers a fictional account of life in the year 2000. It contains abundant speculation about technological invention, including descriptions of a worldwide telephone network, solar power, air travel, space travel to the planets Saturn and Jupiter, and terraforming engineering projects — damming the Arctic Ocean, and adjusting the Earth's axial tilt (by the Terrestrial Axis Straightening Company).
In Astor's novel, the  future United States is a multi-continental superpower. European nations have been taken over by socialist governments, which have sold most of their African colonies to the U.S.; and Canada, Mexico, and the countries of South America have requested annexation. Race conflict is a thing of the past, since the "dark elements" of the American hegemony have died out.
Space travel is achieved through apergy, an anti-gravitational energy force. Jupiter proves to be a jungle world, with flesh-eating plants, vampire bats, giant snakes and mastodons, and flying lizards. The Americans discover a wealth of exploitable resources: iron, silver, gold, lead, copper, coal, and oil.
Saturn, in contrast, is an ancient world of silent spirits. The spirit beings provide the explorers with foresight of their own deaths.
A paperback edition of A Journey in Other Worlds was issued in 2003.John Jacob Astor, A Journey in Other Worlds: A Romance of the Future, Lincoln, NE, Bison Frontiers of Imagination Series, Bison Books, 2003. ISBN 0-8032-5949-2.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


