[[Jan Kregel]]

CATEGORIES: 1944 births, Living people, People from Dallas, Texas, Post-Keynesian economists, Johns Hopkins University faculty, University of Missouri–Kansas City faculty, Tallinn University of Technology faculty

Jan A. Kregel (born 19 April 1944) is an eminent Post-Keynesian economist.
Kregel has served since 2006 as Professor of Finance and Development at Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia. He is an adjunct professor at Johns Hopkins SAIS (SAIS), whose Bologna Center he co-directed in the late 1980s, and a visiting professor at the University of Missouri–Kansas City. He is also one of the Senior Scholars at the Levy Economics Institute of Bard College.  Until 2007, he was Chief of the Policy Analysis and Development Branch of the Financing for Development Office of United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Until 2004, he was High Level Expert in International Finance and Macroeconomics in the New York Liaison Office of UNCTAD, being in essence its chief economist. For many years, he held the Chair for Political Economy at the University of Bologna.
Kregel studied mainly at the University of Cambridge (with Joan Robinson and Nicholas Kaldor) and Rutgers University (Ph.D. 1970 under supervision of Paul Davidson). He is a Life Fellow of the Royal Economic Society in London and in 2000 he co-founded The Other Canon, a center and network for heterodox economics research, with main founder and executive chairman Erik Reinert.http://www.othercanon.org/board/index.html
"In the 1970-75 period, Professor Kregel was concerned with synthesis, integration and delineation of a Post Keynesian methodology and paradigm. From the mid-1970s until the late 1980s, he worked on the analysis of decision making under uncertainty, on formation of asset prices and on Keynes analysis of Chapter 17 of the General Theory. In 1988, Professor Kregel showed that Keynes’ liquidity preference and own rate analysis were actually two sides of the theory of effective demand. His most recent works on price formation and market structure provide a powerful critique of neoclassical price theory and propose a Keynesian alternative in which expectations of the future go into the determination of current price determination and in which institutional arrangements undergird the process of price formation." (University of Missouri in Kansas City)

==Publications by Jan Kregel==

==References==

==External links==


