[[Chlorogalum pomeridianum]]

CATEGORIES: Agavoideae, Flora of California, Flora of Oregon, Flora of California chaparral and woodlands, Flora of the San Francisco Bay Area, Flora of the Channel Islands of California, Flora of the Sierra Nevada (U.S.), Flora of the Transverse Ranges, Natural history of the California Coast Ranges, Natural history of the Santa Monica Mountains, Plants used in Native American cuisine, Plants used in traditional Native American medicine

Chlorogalum pomeridianum, the wavy-leafed soap plant, California soaproot, or Amole, is the most common and most widely distributed of the soap plants, soaproots or amoles, which make up the genus Chlorogalum of flowering plants.Jepson Manual (1993) Chlorogalum pomeridianum . accessed 3.23.2013 It is occasionally known as the "wild potato", but given the plant's lack of either resemblance or relationship to the potato, this name is not recommended.
It is found in most of California, apart from the Sierra Nevada and the deserts, and also in southwestern Oregon. Wavy-leafed soap plant grows on rock bluffs, grasslands, chaparral, and in open woodlands.NRCS—USDA: Chlorogalum pomeridianum

==Description==

Like all the soap plants, Chlorogalum pomeridianum is a perennial that grows from a bulb, which is brown, between 7 and 15 cm in diameter, slightly elongated, and covered in thick, coarse fibers.  The leaves grow from the base of the plant, and can be from 20 to 70 cm long and 6 to 25 mm wide.  As the plant's name indicates, their edges are generally wavy, though this is not always particularly noticeable.  
The flowers are borne on a long stem, normally longer than the leaves, and are from 15 to 30 mm long.  The six petals (actually only three of them are petals in the technical sense; the other three are sepals) are up to 35 mm long and curving.  They are typically white but have a noticeable mid-vein which can be purple or green in color.  The six stamens are large and noticeable, and yellow or orange.  The flowers are bisexual (include both female and male parts).  
They open only in the late afternoon or evening, remaining open during the night but closing by the morning.  Pollination is by evening- or night-flying insects.

===Subspecies===

Three varieties are recognized:
The basionym of the species was Scilla pomeridianum.  It has also been known as Laothoe pomeridiana.

==Uses==

The fibers surrounding the bulb were widely used, bound together, to make small brushes. Extracts of the bulbs could also be used as a sealant or glue.
The juices of the bulb contain saponins that form a lather when mixed with water,Soap Lilies in California, 1998 and both Native American people (e.g. Miwok tribeC.M. Hogan, 2008) and early European settlers used the bulbs as a kind of soap; this is the origin of the plant's name.  It was particularly used for washing hair, since it was held to be effective against dandruff.Univ. of Michigan: Species entry in Moerman's Native American Ethnobotany Database: Chlorogalum pomeridianum
The young leaves can be used as food, but the saponins in the bulbs make these poisonous. However saponins are very poorly absorbed by the body and usually pass straight through, and in any case they can be destroyed by thorough cooking.  The Miwok people roasted and ate the bulbs as a winter food. In February 1847 Patrick Breen of the ill-fated Donner Party recorded that a Native American gave the starving settler some "roots resembling Onions in shape that taste some like a sweet potatoe[tpl]sic[/tpl], all full of little tough fibres." Breen's son later called the roots "California soap-root"—almost certainly C. pomeridianum. 
Saponins are much more toxic to some other animals than they are to humans.  Fish are particularly susceptible, and the bulb juices were used to kill or stun them so they could be caught easily. 
The bulbs also had various medicinal uses, both external (e.g., for making a poultice to be used as an antiseptic, or as a rub in cases of rheumatism) and internal (decoctions were used for a range of purposes, including as a diuretic, as a laxative and against stomachache).

==References==

==External links==


