[[Henry Giroux]]

CATEGORIES: American cultural critics, American educationists, American education writers, American political writers, Educationists, McMaster University faculty, Miami University faculty, Pennsylvania State University faculty, American schoolteachers, Youth empowerment people, 1943 births, Living people, People from Barrington, Rhode Island, People from Providence, Rhode Island, People from Hamilton, Ontario, Critical pedagogy, Postmodern writers

Henry Giroux (born September 18, 1943), is an American scholar and cultural critic. One of the founding theorists of critical pedagogy in the United States, he is best known for his pioneering work in public pedagogy, cultural studies, youth studies, higher education, media studies, and critical theory. In 2002 Routledge named Giroux as one of the top fifty educational thinkers of the modern period.Palmer, J. (2002) Fifty Modern Thinkers on Education: From Piaget to the Present Day (Fifty Key Thinkers) (Routledge Key Guides). Routledge Publishers. p. 208.
A high-school social studies teacher in Barrington, Rhode Island for six years,Personal Essay "The Kids Aren't Alright: Youth Pedagogy and Cultural Studies" in Fugitive Cultures'http://www.henryagiroux.com/bio.html Retrieved 21/09/08. Giroux has held positions at Boston University, Miami University, and Penn State University. In 2005, Giroux began serving as the Global TV Network Chair in English and Cultural Studies at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario(2005) "McMaster attracts widely acclaimed U.S. scholar Henry Giroux" McMaster University. Retrieved 8/6/07.[tpl]Dead link|date=July 2010[/tpl](2005) ""McMaster University snags famous theory professor," e. Peak News.'' Simon Frasier University. Retrieved 8/6/07. He has published more than 50 books and more than 300 academic articles, and is published widely throughout education and cultural studies literature.Dr. Henry A. Giroux – Books. Personal website. Retrieved 8/6/07. 

==Biography==

Henry Giroux was born in Providence, Rhode Island. After teaching high-school social studies in Barrington, Rhode Island for six years, Giroux earned his doctorate at Carnegie-Mellon in 1977. His first position as a professor was in education at Boston University, which he held for the next six years. Following that, he became an education professor and renowned scholar in residence at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio. While there he also served as the founding Director of the Center for Education and Cultural Studies.(n.d.) Henry Giroux Miami University.
In 1992 he began a 12-year position in the Waterbury Chair Professorship at Penn State University, also serving as the Director of the Waterbury Forum in Education and Cultural Studies.(n.d.) Henry A. Giroux – Biography The Arts Council – Dublin. In 2004 Giroux became the Global Television Network Chair in English and Cultural Studies at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario.(n.d.) Henry Giroux – Author Bio In These Times magazine. He is currently the Director of the McMaster Center for Research in the Public Interest. He currently is a Distinguished Visiting Professor at Ryerson University in Toronto, Ontario. 
He currently lives there with his wife, Susan Searls Giroux.

==Theory==

Giroux has been an important contributor to a variety of academic fields, including critical pedagogy, cultural studies, youth studies, and media studies, among others. His work draws from a number of theoretical traditions extending from Marx to Paulo Freire to Zygmunt Bauman. He is also an advocate of radical democracy, vigorously opposing the anti-democratic tendencies of neoliberalism, militarism, imperialism, religious fundamentalism, and the ongoing attacks against the social state, the social wage, youth, the poor, and public and higher education. Giroux's most recent work focuses on public pedagogy, a term he coined to describe the nature of the spectacle and the new media, and the political and educational force of global culture. He is also a regular columnist for Truthout and writes for a variety of academic journals and public venues.

==Accomplishments==

Henry Giroux's writing has won many awards, and is written for a range of public and scholarly sources. Giroux has written more than 55 books; published more than 400 papers; and hundreds of chapters in others' books, articles in magazines, and more. Seven of Giroux's books have been chosen as significant books of the year by the American Educational Studies Association. 
While at Miami University Giroux was named as a Distinguished Scholar. He won the Visiting Distinguished Professor Award for 1987–1988 at the University of Missouri–Kansas City. Between 1992 and 2004, he held the Waterbury Chair Professorship at Penn State University. He was awarded the Visiting Asa Knowles Chair Professorship by Northeastern University in 1995. He won a Tokyo Metropolitan University Fellowship for Research in August 1995. 
In 1998 Giroux was selected to the Laureate Chapter of Kappa Delta Phi. He was awarded a Distinguished Visiting Lectureship in art education at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago in 1998 and 1999. He was the winner of a Getty Research Institute Visiting Scholar Award for May–June 2000. He was selected as a Hooker Distinguished Visiting Professor at McMaster University in 2001. 
Giroux was named as one of the top fifty educational thinkers of the modern period in Fifty Modern Thinkers on Education: From Piaget to the Present as part of Routledge’s "Key Guides Publication Series" (2002). In 2001 he won the James L. Kinneavy Award for the most outstanding article published in JAC in 2001, which was presented by the Association of Teachers of Advanced Composition at the Conference on College Composition and Communication Chicago in March 2002. 
Giroux was selected as the Barstow Visiting Scholar for 2003 at Saginaw Valley State University. In 2005, he was awarded an Honorary Doctorate of Letters by Memorial University of Newfoundland.(2004) "McMaster U. Woos Education Scholar With Job for His Wife", Chronicle of Higher Education. May 28, 2004
The University in Chains was named by the American Educational Studies Association as the recipient of the AESA Critics' Book Choice Award for 2008. He was named by the Toronto Star in 2012 as one of the top 12 Canadians Changing the Way We Think. See Olivia Ward, “12 Canadians changing the way we think,” Toronto Star (January 27, 2012) Education and the Crisis of Public Values: Challenging the Assault on Teachers, students, & Public Education was awarded a CHOICE Outstanding Academic Title and has received the Annual O. L. Davis, Jr. Outstanding Book Award from the AATC (American Association for Teaching and Curriculum) and the AESA (American Educational Studies Association) Critics Choice Award 2012.

==Publications by Giroux==

In addition to being a co-Editor-in-chief of the Review of Education, Pedagogy and Cultural StudiesReview of Education, Pedagogy and Cultural Studies Taylor and Francis. Retrieved 7/21/07 published by Taylor and Francis, Giroux has published the following books:

==Books about Giroux==

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


