[[Nick at Nite]]

CATEGORIES: Nickelodeon, Nickelodeon programming blocks, Television programming blocks, American television networks, Television channels and stations established in 1985

Nick at Nite (stylized as nick@nite) is a nighttime cable network that broadcasts over the channel space of Nickelodeon, owned by the MTV Networks Kids & Family Group, a unit of the Viacom Media Networks division of Viacom. It broadcasts on Sunday-Wednesdays from 8 p.m. to 7 a.m., Thursdays and Fridays from 9 p.m. to 7 a.m., and Saturdays from 10 p.m. to 7 a.m. (Eastern and Pacific Time).
Although it shares channel space with Nickelodeon, Nielsen counts Nick at Nite as a separate channel from Nickelodeon for ratings purposes.[tpl]cite web|url=http://articles.latimes.com/2004/mar/25/business/fi-nick25 |title=Nickelodeon Squeezes 2 Ratings Out of 1 Very Diverse Network – Los Angeles Times |publisher=Articles.latimes.com |date=2004-03-25 |accessdate=2012-10-24[/tpl] Both services are sometimes collectively referred to as "Nickelodeon/Nick at Nite", due to their common association as two individual channels sharing a single channel space.NICKELODEON/NICK AT NITE (WEST)
Nick at Nite appeals to adult and/or adolescent audiences with a lineup of mainly live-action sitcom reruns and some limited original programming. However because Nick at Nite shares channel space with Nickelodeon (prefiguring Cartoon Network and Adult Swim), some of Nick at Nite is aimed at pre-teenagers ages 8-12 year olds, the content on Nick at Nite (though looser in regards to profanity and suggestive dialogue compared to the children's-oriented Nickelodeon) is not as raunchy and less violent, encouraging a crossover audience between it and Nickelodeon viewers.
As of August 2013, Nickelodeon/Nick at Nite is available to approximately 98,799,000 pay television households (86.51% of households with television) in the United States.[tpl]cite web |url=http://tvbythenumbers.zap2it.com/2013/08/23/list-of-how-many-homes-each-cable-networks-is-in-cable-network-coverage-estimates-as-of-august-2013/199072/ |title=List of How Many Homes Each Cable Networks Is In - Cable Network Coverage Estimates As Of August 2013 |last=Seidman |first=Robert |work=TV by the Numbers |publisher=Zap2it |date=August 23, 2013 |accessdate=September 6, 2013[/tpl]

==History==

Nick at Nite debuted at 8 p.m. ET on July 1, 1985 as a block on Nickelodeon. MTV Networks President Bob Pittman had asked Nickelodeon general manager Geraldine Laybourne to develop programming to fill the time vacated by A&E (which occupied the former Alpha Repertory Television Service timeslot), after it ceased to carry its programming over Nickelodeon's channel space to become its own 24-hour cable channel, to take better advantage of valuable satellite time. After futile attempts at original program development, Laybourne asked programming and branding consultants Alan Goodman and Fred Seibert of Fred/Alan Inc. (successful as the original MTV branders, and for Nickelodeon's extensive 1984 rebranding) to come up with programming.
After being presented with over 200 episodes of The Donna Reed Show (which Laybourne despised), Goodman and Seibert conceived the idea of the "first oldies TV network." They modeled the new evening and overnight programming block on the successful oldies radio format, "The Greatest Hits of All Time", and branded the block with their next evolution of MTV- and Nickelodeon-style imagery and bumpers. Head programmer Debby Beece led the team to the name "Nick at Nite", and Fred/Alan developed the original logo with Tom Corey and Scott Nash of Boston advertising firm Corey McPherson Nash, creators of the well-recognized Nickelodeon orange logo.
Its initial programming (running from 8 p.m.-6 a.m., seven days a week) was a block of classic sitcoms such as The Donna Reed Show and Dennis the Menace, and the classic drama Route 66. The initial lineup also included the Nick at Nite Movie, which aired nightly and included such classic films as the 1947 film The Red House and the 1937 film A Star is Born. As Nick at Nite grew, it would add to its library of shows branching out to rerun sketch comedy, such as original Saturday Night Live episodes as well as the Canadian series SCTV. It also briefly reran the 1970s mock local talk show Fernwood 2Night. As the years went by, the channel's sitcom library swelled to over a hundred shows. For the channel's 20th birthday celebration in June 2005, TV Land aired an episode from almost every series that had appeared on Nick at Nite.
In 1995, Nick at Nite celebrated its 10th Anniversary with a week long event. Throughout the week, the channel aired "hand picked episodes" of almost every series aired on the network. Each episode was introduced with its history, episode number, and how long it ran on Nick at Nite. The 10th Anniversary on-screen bug was shown at the bottom left corner of the screen for 10 seconds once per half hour show, it was used for the entire year of 1995 as was the 20th Anniversary logo in 2005; nothing was done for the 25th Anniversary in 2010 however, as Nick at Nite did not make any acknowledgment of that anniversary of its debut at all.
130px|right|thumb|Nick at Nite logo used from September 1, 2002-September 1, 2007. The 2006-September 1, 2007 version of this logo was colored orange instead of blue.Nick at Nite also spun off a niche network, TV Land, in 1996, which features a variety of rerun programming. The networks were operated together until December 17, 2006, when Nickelodeon began overseeing Nick at Nite, and "Nick at Nite's TV Land" became "TV Land". On February 13, 2006, the Latin American version of Nickelodeon started broadcasting Nick at Nite for the first time. Since January 2007, the network has aired shows such as ALF, Mork & Mindy, The Addams Family, The Munsters, Bewitched, I Dream of Jeannie, Growing Pains, The Facts of Life, Diff'rent Strokes, Get Smart and Perfect Strangers, which have been broadcast in Latin American local networks and other cable channels. Although the Latin American Nickelodeon was launched in the mid-1990s, it had never carried the Nick at Nite block before; the Latin American version of Nick at Nite has since removed all of its classic shows and now only airs former Nickelodeon series, both Nicktoons and live-action comedy series such as Zoey 101, Ned's Declassified School Survival Guide, True Jackson, VP, Hey Arnold!, Rocko's Modern Life and Rocket Power.Mundonick.com
In March 2004, Nick at Nite and Nickelodeon were split up in the Nielsen primetime and total day ratings, due to the different programming, advertisers and target audiences between the two services; this caused controversy among executives of some cable channels believing this manipulated the ratings, given that Nick at Nite's broadcast day takes up only a fraction of Nickelodeon's programming schedule.[tpl]cite web|url=http://www.multichannel.com/article/79731-Nielsen_s_51_Solution_Nixes_Nicks.php |title=Nielsen’s 51% Solution Nixes Nicks | Cable Television News | Broadcast Syndication | Programming |publisher=Multichannel.com |date=2004-07-19 |accessdate=2012-10-24[/tpl] Nickelodeon's and Nick at Nite's respective ratings periods encompass only the hours they each operate under the total day rankings, though Nick at Nite is rated only for the primetime ratings; this is due to a ruling by Nielsen in July 2004, that networks have to program for 51% or more of a daypart to qualify for ratings for a particular daypart.[tpl]cite web|url=http://www.multichannel.com/article/75906-Nielsen_Changes_Some_Cable_Ratings_Rules.php |title=Content | Cable Television News | Broadcast Syndication | Programming |publisher=Multichannel.com |date= |accessdate=2012-10-24[/tpl]
In 2007, the Nick at Nite logo changed the color from blue to orange thus creating a match with Nickelodeon's colors. On September 1, 2007, a new logo similar to the former Nickelodeon logo but with the Nick "splat" in the shape of a crescent moon, was introduced. This marked the first time that the Nickelodeon branding was used on Nick at Nite, as the logos used from its launch used variants of the Futura Condensed font (the former Nickelodeon logo used a Balloon font) with various shape backgrounds and a small circle with the word "at" (a circle background and the "@" sign after 2002) lodged between the "I"[tpl]'[/tpl]s in the logos staggering them.
On July 5, 2009, Nick at Nite extended its programming hours to end at 7 a.m. seven days a week (the weekend lineup ended one hour earlier from April to June 2010 and from January to May 2011) and to begin at 8 p.m. ET on Sunday through Thursday nights and 9 p.m. ET on Friday nights (the Saturday lineup continues to have a 10 p.m. ET start time due to the presence of the long-running Saturday primetime comedy lineup on Nickelodeon). Nick at Nite's times of operation have changed several times over the years, to at one point (between 1998 and 2000) beginning as late as 9 p.m. ET on Sunday-Thursdays and ending as early as 5:30 a.m. ET.
The logo changed again on September 28, 2009 upon the launch of Nickelodeon's universal rebranding effort, with Nick at Nite stylized as "nick@nite" rendered as one word in lower case letters within the new network logo. The @ sign had been used in the Nick at Nite logo from 2002 to 2007 for visual symmetry, owing to the character's building ubiquity from the Internet and eventually into general pop culture. Video has surfaced on YouTube showing the logo change. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=08xTZOBcENQ Nick at Nite also stopped using the show's production credits for most shows (except those that have tag scenes during the end credits) instead employing generic closing credits, bringing it in line with Nickelodeon which has been using generic credits since at least 2000; though it (and Nickelodeon) often omits some shows' end tag scenes or blooper reels using this format.

==Programming==

Nick at Nite is known as the "first classic TV network", having originally aired older classic television programs from the 1950s through the early 1970s throughout the night. The time range of Nick at Nite's programming has shifted over time, to the point where by the early 2000s, its classic series consisted of shows from the 1980s and 1990s, and also included series from the early and mid-2000s by the end of that decade and into the early 2010s. The early success with classic television series, as well as the eventual shift away from series made prior to 1985, eventually led to the creation of digital broadcast networks similar to the service's original format such as the Retro Television Network, Antenna TV and Me-TV (which have featured many shows formerly seen on Nick at Nite). Presently, Nick at Nite's lineup includes programming block marathon episodes of the family friendly classic  Full House. Nick at Nite also airs off the clock programming and airs sitcoms that are not so family friendly such as block marathon episodes of Friends,  That 70's Show,  George Lopez Show,  Yes Dear,  Hangin' With Mr. Cooper, along with occasional movies and some Nickelodeon original programming such as See Dad Run and Instant Mom during early primetime hours.
Nick at Nite airs virtually all of its programming in hour-long (and sometimes two-hour) blocks, known from 2002 to 2007 as "Double Takes"; typically series that air back-to-back air in two blocks, one in primetime and one in late night. Typically, older series on the Nick at Nite schedule are often are moved exclusively to the overnight hours after some time in order to make room for newly acquired series (though in the past, this was not always the case as entire broadcast runs of a few series such as Perfect Strangers and Charles in Charge have aired in an overnight graveyard slot for a short period of time). For about a year-and-a-half prior to the September 28, 2009 rebrand, Nick at Nite aired marathons of programming from midnight to 5 a.m. ET.
Nick at Nite is one of the few basic cable channels in the United States that continues to sign off for scheduled satellite maintenance, occurring on a Wednesday morning from 5:30-6 a.m. ET on a bi-monthly basis, displaying the SMPTE color bars during the sign-off period (Viacom-owned sister channels Nick Jr., Nicktoons, MTV and its spinoff channels, VH1, and VH1 Classic also sign off for a half-hour on a bi-monthly basis at the same time as Nick at Nite for the same reason); it is also one of only a handful of cable channels to have discontinued airing infomercials, Nick at Nite ran infomercials in some overnight timeslots from 1987 to 1998 (it is only one of two Viacom-owned networks to have removed paid programming from its schedule, sister channel BET had discontinued infomercials in 1997, replacing them with religious programming in overnight/early morning timeslotsBET Bails On Infomercials, ''MediaPost', July 1, 2002,).
On May 16, 2011, Nick at Nite began broadcasting its 11 p.m.-6 a.m. programming in an "off-the-clock" format, previously used by sister network TV Land beginning in 2010 and since adopted by other Viacom networks including MTV, BET and Spike around the same time as Nick at Nite, in which the amount of advertising during commercial breaks is increased (a method that has drawn viewer criticism due to the length from the start of each commercial break to the start of the next segment of a programViacom Loads More Ads on Channels, The Wall Street Journal, August 26, 2012.), allowing the programs to be broadcast in a longer timeslot each half-hour until 6 a.m. ET, when start times return to a half-hourly format; the tradeoff that results from the format is one full half-hour of programming is lost, therefore one series airing on that night's schedule is reduced to a single episode.Nick at Nite Adding That '70s Show in June 2011, Buffy Finally Scheduled on TeenNick; The Hub Adds Jem, Sitcoms Online, May 23, 2011. Retrieved May 24, 2011.
On June 25, 2012, Nick at Nite began airing Nickelodeon programs for the first time, airing reruns of All That and Kenan and Kel from 8-9 p.m. weeknights. ET. Two weeks later, the two series were replaced with reruns of Victorious, before being replaced by Hollywood Heights, which would move to TeenNick halfway through its first (and only) season due to low ratings. Currently, Nickelodeon and Nick at Nite share the 8-9 p.m. ET timeslot on weeknights.

===Movies===

In addition to running sitcom reruns, Nick at Nite has also experimented with airing movies in early primetime; the first time this occurred was from 1985 to 1989, the channel did not air movies on its schedule again until the summer of 2007 when films aired weekly on Tuesday nights. The channel has aired films occasionally since then, and have begun to air them periodically since February 2010 on Sunday nights, beginning that month with telecasts of the Nickelodeon Movies-produced Harriet the Spy and Cartoon Network's Anastasia.
Some movies and special presentations that Nick at Nite aired during 2010 and 2011 had occasionally aired over what is normally Nickelodeon's broadcast time (e.g., the February 21, 2010 original telecast of the special School Gyrls aired at 7 p.m. ET, though Nickelodeon typically does not turn over its channel space to Nick at Nite until 8 p.m. ET on Sunday nights), which is unusual as some of these special presentations are aimed at Nickelodeon's preteen target audience; however until May 2010, promos for these films did not acknowledge they were to be broadcast on Nick at Nite (making it unclear whether the film is airing on Nickelodeon or Nick at Nite as promos for scheduled primetime films were cross-promoted with Nickelodeon), making the only reference they were being aired on Nick at Nite was when the channel's logo bug is shown during the film; since May 2010, promos for films airing on the channel now are advertised as airing on Nick at Nite. Some movies aired by Nick at Nite have included the Back to the Future trilogy, Ferris Bueller's Day Off, Baby's Day Out, Pretty in Pink, National Lampoon's Vacation, Ghostbusters (and its sequel Ghostbusters II), Jurassic Park, The Nutty Professor and Legally Blonde. Film telecasts have become more common on Nick at Nite since the fall of 2012, often airing on a near-weekly basis, typically on Sunday evenings.

===Original programming===

Nick at Nite has also occasionally experimented with creating its own programs, sometimes with bizarre and surrealistic results. On December 5, 1987, the channel had a contest called the Do It Yourself Sitcom Special, which was billed as the first time real people ever had their own television shows. Viewers submitted their own sitcom ideas and the winner would supposedly get their own show. In 1988, the channel aired a half-hour animated Christmas special, the pilot for what was to be an animated series entitled Tattertown, created by Ralph Bakshi. The series never emerged, but the special, later renamed Christmas in Tattertown, was aired every Christmas on Nick at Nite for several years. In 1990, the channel briefly aired a show called On the Television,"On the Television" (1990) a mock critic show hosted by Siskel and Ebert-type characters and featured bizarre, sometimes disturbing clips from parodied television shows supposedly beginning that week.
In the early 1990s, the channel ran a one-time special featuring old television commercials, but the idea of showing old commercials would be rehashed by the network on several other shows and eventually become a staple of offshoot channel, TV Land. There was one special that was promoted as a TV dad quiz. The host walked through a "typical TV Home", and quizzed the viewers at home with trivia about classic TV dad clichés. At one point, the host told the viewers to connect pictures of TV dads with their appropriate TV moms displayed on the screen with a magic marker. At the end of this segment he mentions that he forgot to tell the viewers to place a piece of plastic over their screen while doing this and made jokes about the viewers futilely trying to clean the magic marker off their screens for the rest of the show.
In 1991, Nick at Nite created its own sitcom based around the rerun genre it had pioneered. The sitcom, named Hi Honey, I'm Home! (named after the cliché phrase used by in sitcoms where dads addressing their wives when returning home in the evenings from work) and focused on a 1950s sitcom family called the Nielsens, whose show has been removed from syndication, forcing the family to leave TV Land and move into a real 1990s suburban neighborhood, repeatedly confronting the family with culture shock. The show aired on ABC on Fridays during the network's TGIF lineup, and then would "rerun" on Nick at Nite the following Sunday nights.
In 2008, the channel announced that it was making a remake of the 1990s game show Nickelodeon GUTS called My Family's Got GUTS for families, as well as developing a dog competition show.[tpl]cite web|author=Michael Schneider |url=http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117985126.html?categoryid=14&cs=1 |title=Nick at Nite integrating ‘Family’ TV |publisher=Variety |date=2008-05-05 |accessdate=2013-09-30[/tpl] My Family's Got GUTS eventually premiered on Nickelodeon in September 2008. On August 17, 2009, Nick at Nite debuted a new stop-motion claymation series called Glenn Martin DDS, which ran for two seasons. Scripted programming returned to Nick at Nite in 2012, with the June 11 debut of the telenovela-based Hollywood Heights, followed on October 6 with the premiere of See Dad Run.

===Marathons===

Programming marathons were an innovation that began with Nick at Nite in 1985. Working together in college radio at WKCR-FM (Columbia University, New York) Fred/Alan's Alan Goodman and Fred Seibert saw the ratings success of radio marathons featuring Ludwig van Beethoven, John Coltrane and Charles Mingus. As the Nick at Nite "oldies" format was adapted from radio, they suggested the multi-hour (sometimes multi-day) marathon might also work with television programming. The marathon format proved successful and marathons became a ratings boosting staple of cable television networks for over two decades.
During the week of Halloween 1990, the network held a special contest, hosted by game show host Wink Martindale, during a marathon of Alfred Hitchcock Presents. Viewers at home were supposed to keep a running total of the total number of deaths on the show. At the end of the marathon, the persons who had gotten the correct total were entered into a drawing to win a prize. As Martindale said "It's kind of like guessing the number of jelly beans in a jelly bean jar, but instead of jelly beans, you're using cadavers!"[tpl]Citation needed|date=October 2007[/tpl]
When new shows are added to the lineup, they are usually accompanied by some kind of marathon that is sometimes hosted by a star from the show. For instance, when Newhart joined Nick at Nite in the early 1990s, the channel also acquired Bob Newhart's short-lived third sitcom Bob, and showed a programming block entitled "Bob's Bob, Bob Newhart, Newhart Marathon", featuring the two shows along with The Bob Newhart Show (which it already had the rights to), in a programming block hosted by Bob Newhart. Nick at Nite's debut of The Mary Tyler Moore Show was called the "Marython". When I Love Lucy joined Nick at Nite in 1994, "Nick at Nite Loves Lucy" marathon aired all week which showed every Lucille Ball series (I Love Lucy, The Lucy-Desi Comedy Hour, The Lucy Show, Here's Lucy and Life With Lucy). When some older shows were retired, Nick at Nite would also frequently have a marathon send-off. For instance, when Mister Ed was finally retired from the network in 1993 after a seven-year run, Nick at Nite ran a weekend-long marathon of the show called "Au Revoir Mister Ed!" as well as a similar send-off for The Donna Reed Show, which ran on the channel for nine years (from 1985 to 1994). My Three Sons was sent off the night Daylight Savings Time ended in 1991, permitting two extra episodes in the marathon, called "Nite of the Setting Sons".
During the summer months of the mid-to-late 1990s, the channel for a while ran a program block called "Vertivision" (later known as "Block Party Summer") during which a different series was shown in a three-hour block each night of the week. In the first year, network promos referred to the nights as "Mary Mondays", "Lucy Tuesdays", "Bewitched Be-Wednesdays", "Jeannie Thursdays" and "Sgt. Joe Fridays" (for The Mary Tyler Moore Show, I Love Lucy, Bewitched, I Dream of Jeannie and Dragnet, respectively). With the passing years, the summer blocks shifted to include series recently added to Nick at Nite's program inventory.
Other seasonal scheduling blocks were also not uncommon such as Christmas-themed blocks during late December, Thanksgiving-themed blocks in November, and Valentine's Day-themed episodes in February. Each New Year's Eve from 1989 to 1998, the channel would host "Nick at Nite's (year) Rerun/Classic TV/TV Hits Countdown" hosted by longtime countdown radio DJ, Casey Kasem. Kasem would spend the period from noon (11:30 a.m. in 1990) until New Year's Day at 12:30 a.m. ET counting down the 25 "most classic" episodes of the TV shows currently airing on Nick at Nite determined by viewers at home, revealing the #1 episode at midnight.
Another famous scheduling block was the "Lucy: Queen of Comedy" block which ran on Saturday nights from June 4, 1994 to May 3, 1996. The line-up consisted of I Love Lucy, The Lucy Show and The Lucy-Desi Comedy Hour, which were all airing on the network at that time (a similar block called "A Whole Lotta Lucy" aired on Saturday nights from 1996 to 2001, featuring only I Love Lucy and The Lucy-Desi Comedy Hour). In the mid-1990s, another programming block entitled "Very, Very Nick at Nite" aired which centered around a theme each Saturday night, such as "Very Very Mary" with four classic Mary Tyler Moore Show episodes. In summer of 2008, Nick at Nite aired a marathon called Battle of the Sexes, which featured episodes of their regular programs that involved conflict between men and women.
Nick at Nite generally broadcasts a marathon of their programming on holidays (such as the "Luck of the Lopez" marathon of George Lopez that aired on Saint Patrick's Day one year). For two years in a row, in 2007 and 2008, Nick at Nite broadcast the Shocktober marathon around Halloween, featuring Halloween-themed episodes of the regularly scheduled program; however, the second year running in 2008, it was titled Shocktober 2. Other holidays that have been featured as marathons include Mother's Day, Father's Day and Christmas. In November 2006, regular Nick at Nite programming was preempted for Nickelodeon's "Best Day Ever", a 24-hour marathon of SpongeBob SquarePants episodes which, at the end of the marathon, led to a new episode with the same name. Nick at Nite programming was again preempted to continue Nickelodeon's 48-hour "SpongeBob SpongeBash" marathon in July 2009.

==Branding and commercials==

Nick at Nite has used a myriad of unusual and unorthodox commercials, logos and promotions. Alan Goodman and Fred Seibert assembled a team of highly imaginative writer/producers, modeled on their original 1981 creative team that had launched sister channel MTV. Including Scott Webb, Jim Levi, Dave Potorti, Jay Newell, Will McRobb and Tom Hill, the group was guided towards created a series of internal campaigns to emphasize the seeming paradox of a contemporary network setting that programmed reruns from the 1960s and earlier. A series of five "promises" were organized into four 30 second spots each hour, each emphasizing an attribute of the innovative programming format.
In 1986, the channel began running a few different animated 10-second channel identifications that were repetitive in nature, but all had vastly different endings, similar to the "watch me pull a rabbit out of my hat" gag from The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show. In one such ID, the first chord of "A Hard Day's Night" would strum, and a man would first hang-up a Nick At Nite logo then bring in common living room objects such as a chair and a television set. He then sat down in front of the TV and clicked the remote upon which something bizarre would happen, such as a gorilla appearing. Before a promo ended, the Nick at Nite logo would appear, somehow tied to the premise of the promo. Other IDs included either a woman setting up her backyard behind a "city", which was made of cardboard, or a couple setting up their living rooms. These idents were used in many different variations until 1991 when they were discontinued, and replaced with updated and newer idents. These IDs were produced by Eli Noyes and Kit Laybourne, and the Fred/Alan agency.
Throughout most of the 1990s (beginning particularly in 1991), Nick at Nite started running a wide variety of IDs. These were made with almost every imaginable technique from limited animation, to claymation and stop motion, to original live action and stock footage. Almost every commercial had a different jingle professing Nick at Nite as being "A TV Viewer's Dream" for "the TV generation" and as coming from a place called "TV Land" ("Hello Out there, from TV Land!"), and promoting "Better Living Through Television" and proclaimed itself curator of "Our Television Heritage", although these claims were always somewhat tongue in cheek. There were also sarcastic promotions created for shows airing on the network: an announcer's voice would discuss the series, accompanied by clips and music, and sometimes the show's theme song. The commercials would use an actor's line or expression and take it out of context to create a new subversive meaning. The channel still uses this technique today, although often in a more hybrid way. A popular take-off of the Michelob Light commercial; "The Nite Belongs to Nick" ran for a short period of time before being discontinued due to copyright issues. One series of promos had Dick Van Dyke (whose own '60s sitcom was a mainstay of the channel in the 1990s) depicted as "Chairman of Nick at Nite" (ironically, this idea was later reused as one of Nick at Nite's sister networks, TeenNick, would use actor and television personality Nick Cannon depicted as the "Chairman of TeenNick" in a series of promos that began airing in 2009).
The early 1990s also saw the addition of Nick at Nite's mascot, Dixie the TV Land Pixie. For a time, the network would also play a short bumper called "Milkman", about a milkman who would distribute wholesome advice to customers on his milk delivery route. In 1995, on the occasion of the network's 10th anniversary, a tribute to the commercials throughout the network's existence was aired and hosted by former network president Rich Cronin.
The channel also had a unique way of telling viewers what shows were about to play next. Beginning as only an announcer reading off that evening's block of shows and the times they would be on while the list was displayed and music was played, this simple concept would be revised and re-revised many times over. At one point, a television with objects and people from the show scrolling by (for instance, for Get Smart a shoe phone, gun, and Max and 99) would appear on the screen while the announcer read off the show and time; the time that the show was scheduled to air would be displayed in another box; this continues to be changed and updated.
The station also had a wide variety of "bugs" or logos displayed in promos and in the lower left corner of the screen, the lower right from 1998 on. The network had a variety of bumpers; from 1992 to 1998, the bumpers had a yellow diamond Nick at Nite logo with tonite next to it. At the end of them, the announcer said "Nick at Nite: Classic TV with a capital C", or "Nick at Nite: Open all nite" (which had an animated background of a diner with the words "Nick at Nite" on top). The channel's continuity announcer from 1992 to 2007, Bill St. James, has also served as an announcer for the premium channels Showtime, The Movie Channel (both former sister channels to Nick at Nite) and HBO as well as serving as the host of the radio shows Flashback and Time Warp (which focus on classic rock and oldies music). From 1997 to 2002, the bumpers included a cartoon drawing of a girl watching TV, two tikis with a tucan and a TV or a drawing of three guys in a taxi above the moons and stars. At the end the announcer would say "On the place for TV Hits", a woman's voice that would then be heard saying "Nick at Nite". Although introduced in 1997, it was used intact with the 1992 Nick at Nite "Classic TV" schedule bumper until 1998. In fact, one bumper had the "TV Hits" background schemes (a city with the Nick at Nite logo on a billboard), and the announcer announced "It's Classic TV", and the woman singing "Nick at Nite". Another bumper from 1992 had the yellow Nick at Nite logo against colorful squares and the announced "Right here on", and the woman singing "Nick at Nite".

===Network slogans===

==Ratings==

Nick at Nite is ranked number one with Adults 18-49 for 2009 in total day, according to Nielsen Media Research (12/31/07-12/14/08) -- averaging a .6/655,000 A18-49 (up +20% in rating over last year), and marking its most-watched year in four years with A18-49.
According to MarketWatch, Nick at Nite is the top cable network with Adults 18-49. In total day, average ratings are about 1.5 million viewers. It is also the #1 cable network among women aged 18–49 averaging a 0.7 rating/415,000 total viewers.[tpl]cite web|url=http://www.thefutoncritic.com/news.aspx?id=20091222nickelodeon01 |title=Breaking News – Nickelodeon Is 2009's Top-Ranked Cable Network |publisher=TheFutonCritic.com |date=2009-12-22 |accessdate=2012-10-24[/tpl]

==TV Land==

TV Land launched on April 29, 1996,Bianculli, David, "Oldies Net Loaded with Goodies"; New York Daily News, March 19, 1996 and is a spinoff of Nick at Nite; the channel is usually carried on the basic tiers of cable, IPTV and satellite providers. During its early years, the channel ran classic TV series from the early 1950s to the 1970s. In 2004, TV Land began to include sitcoms from the 1980s and 1990s, and as the decade progressed, reality shows and weekly movie presentations were added; however much of TV Land's programming remains to feature series from the 1960s and 1970s. Like Nick at Nite, TV Land airs a minimal amount of original programming, originally consisting of only original reality series and by 2010, the channel's first original scripted series Hot in Cleveland.
The channel formerly ran a nightly programming block aimed at 40- to 55-year-olds called "TV Land PRIME", which aired from 9 p.m.-12 a.m. ET/PT from 2008 to 2010 (though curiously, shows that aired within the block that also aired in other timeslots displayed the block's logo bug). In 2006, TV Land stopped operating under the control of Nick at Nite as Nickelodeon began overseeing that service, though TV Land is still operated as part of Viacom's MTV Networks division. Many series that have been aired by Nick at Nite, such as Three's Company, The Cosby Show and Home Improvement have either been shared between Nick at Nite and TV Land, or moved to TV Land entirely. As of January 2010, TV Land is one of only three Viacom-owned channels to air infomercials (the only others being CMT and Spike).

==International==

Despite the large international presence of Nickelodeon, Nick at Nite does not have as much widespread coverage. International versions of Nick at Nite currently exist in Latin America, Japan and Southeast Asia. A British version of Nick at Nite was planned for launch in the United Kingdom, and for India also but plans for this were later scrapped.

==See also==

==References==

==External links==


