[[Judy Tyler]]

CATEGORIES: 1932 births, 1957 deaths, American film actresses, American television actresses, Burials at Ferncliff Cemetery, Elvis Presley, Actresses from Milwaukee, Wisconsin, People from Teaneck, New Jersey, Road accident deaths in Wyoming, People from Shorewood, Wisconsin, 20th-century American actresses

Judy Tyler (October 9, 1932 – July 3, 1957) was an American actress.Obituary Variety, July 10, 1957, page 127.

==Early life and career==

Born Judith Mae Hess in Milwaukee, she came from a show business family and was encouraged to study dance and acting. Her acting career began as a teenager with regular appearances on Howdy Doody as Princess Summerfall Winterspring from 1950 to 1953.
Like her mother, she became a chorus girl but then went on to star in a major role in the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical, Pipe Dream. Life did a story on rising Broadway talent with Tyler on the magazine's cover as one of the up-and-coming stars. She lived with her parents in Teaneck, New Jersey when appearing on Howdy Doody and Broadway."JUDY TYLER DIES AS CARS COLLIDE; Actress and Husband Killed by Crash in Wyoming-- Was on 'Howdy Doody'", The New York Times, July 4, 1957. Accessed August 8, 2008. She made a guest appearance on Perry Mason as Irene Kilby in "The Case of the Fan Dancer's Horse" which aired December 28, 1957, nearly six months after her death.
Offered an opportunity in Hollywood, Tyler appeared in the film Bop Girl Goes Calypso then starred opposite Elvis Presley in Jailhouse Rock (1957).

==Death==

After completing filming of the Presley movie, she and her second husband, Greg Lafayette, left Los Angeles to drive back home to their apartment in Manhattan. While driving through Wyoming on July 3, 1957, they were involved in an automobile accident on U.S. Route 30 just 3 miles north of Rock River. Judy was killed instantly and Greg died the next day at a hospital in Laramie.
Tyler's cremated remains are in the private family room of her husband in the mausoleum in Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale, New York.

==References==

==External links==



