[[Alai (Ender's Game)]]

CATEGORIES: Ender's Game series characters, Fictional soldiers, Fictional characters introduced in 1985, Characters in American novels of the 20th century, Characters in American novels of the 21st century

Alai (pronounced ah-lie) is a major character in Ender's Game series by Orson Scott Card. He appears in the novels Ender's Game, Ender's Shadow, Shadow of the Hegemon, Shadow Puppets and Shadow of the Giant. He is a Battle School student of African descent.
In Battle School, Alai is an exceptional student, adroit in the battle room, and is one of the first kids to befriend Ender, in one of the early battle room training sessions that they are both a part of. He also helps lead the special launchy training sessions Ender conducts.  These training sessions developed the skills of students in the zero-gravity game that is played at Battle School. This game is designed to teach students military tactics and skills. Alai is considered to be almost as good strategically as Ender is.
However, when Ender becomes commander of Dragon Army, they have a falling-out of sorts. Ender attempts to rekindle the friendship by proposing "salaam" again; but Alai says it is not to be, and tells him of the meaning, which is "peace." Alai is also one of the final eleven commanders, Ender's Jeesh, that lead under Ender's command during the Third Invasion in which the Buggers are eliminated.
In Shadow Puppets, Alai has become a caliph for the Muslim nations: their chief military, political and spiritual leader. He then successfully orchestrates a combined attack against China, removing from China's control both its recent acquisitions in India and the rest of Southern Asia. He also divides up other provinces of China, such as Tibet (independent now), Xinjiang, and Inner Mongolia (given to Mongolia).
In Shadow of the Giant, Alai's empire starts to fall apart due to the actions of extremists. He faces a China under the control of Han Tzu, a fellow jeesh member; and India under the control of the Battle School graduate Virlomi, who has declared herself a Hindu Goddess. Alai allies with India by marrying Virlomi, but turmoil leads the extremists and the Indian people to conspire against him. Alai flees his empire after narrowly escaping an assassination attempt. After peace is restored, Alai leaves Earth with the help of the International Fleet to colonize another world.

