[[Monique Smith]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, Year of birth missing (living people), Ontario Liberal Party MPPs, People from North Bay, Ontario, Women MPPs in Ontario, University of Toronto alumni, Queen's University alumni, Members of the Executive Council of Ontario

Monique M. Smith is a former politician in Ontario, Canada.  She was a member of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario, representing the riding of Nipissing for the Liberal Party, from 2003 until 2011.  Her father, Richard Smith, also represented Nipissing in the legislature from 1965 to 1977; her mother Marthe Smith was the Liberal candidate for the riding in 1987.

==Early life and career==

Smith was born and raised in North Bay, Ontario, the largest city in the Nipissing riding.  She has a Bachelor of Arts degree from the University of Toronto, and a law degree from Queen's University.  After graduating, she worked at the Toronto law firm of McCarthy Tétrault until 1997, when she resigned to work as chief of staff for provincial Liberal leader Dalton McGuinty.  She served as director of operations for the Liberals in the 1999 provincial election, which the party lost.
After this election, Smith became executive director of the Association of Canadian Publishers, and represented the organization across the country.  She returned to North Bay in 2002, and worked for the firm of Larmer and Larmer.

==Member of Provincial Parliament==

Smith first ran for political office in the 2003 provincial election, in the Nipissing riding (until recently held by former Progressive Conservative Premier Mike Harris).  Despite her roots in the North Bay community, she was often described as a "Toronto lawyer" and a "parachute candidate" by the Tory campaign.  These criticisms were not an obstacle to her being elected, and she defeated Harris' immediate successor, Al McDonald, by just over 3,000 votes.
The Liberals won the election, and Smith was subsequently named parliamentary assistant to George Smitherman, the Minister of Health and Long-Term Care.  In December 2003, Smitherman commissioned her to undertake a comprehensive review of the province's long-term care system.  The review was published in May 2004 calling for more funding and inspections.
On October 30, 2007 following the provincial election, Premier Dalton McGuinty appointed Smith into cabinet as the province's Minister of Revenue.
In a cabinet shuffle on September 18, 2008, Smith was appointed as the province's Minister of Tourism.Making Ontario More Competitive at Home and Abroad
On February 4, 2009 Smith was appointed Government House Leader.  She continued as Ontario's Minister of Tourism until she was appointed Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs in January 2010.
On November 19, 2010, Smith announced that she would not run in the 2011 election."Another McGuinty Liberal bows out". Toronto Star, November 19, 2010.
On August 15, 2013, she was appointed by Premier Kathleen Wynne to run Ontario's office in the Canadian embassy in Washington. "Former Liberal minister Monique Smith appointed Ontario’s envoy to Washington". Toronto Star, August 15, 2013.

==Electoral record==

==References==

==External links==


