[[Susan Weber Soros]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, Living people, People from Brooklyn, American historians, American people of Russian-Jewish descent, Jewish American historians, Alumni of the Royal College of Art, Barnard College alumni, Parsons School of Design alumni, George Soros, Women historians

Susan Weber Soros (born 1954, Brooklyn, New York City) is an American academic and educational director. She is the founder and director of the Bard Graduate Center (BGC) for studies in the Decorative Arts, Design History, and Material Culture affiliated with Bard College.

==Early life and career==

Weber grew up in the New York area, the daughter of Murray Weber a manufacturer of shoe accessories and Iris Weber, a housewife. Her father had emigrated from Russia. Her mother passed on her fondness for the decorative arts. Weber grew up in a non-observant Jewish household; summing up her upbringing, Susan stated "we were cultural Jews." She attended an Episcopalian high school in BrooklynSoros: The Life and Times of a Messianic Billionaire - By Michael T. Kaufman and graduated from Barnard College with a degree in art history.New York Times: "AT HOME WITH: SUSAN SOROS;A Private Life, A Public Passion" By DINITIA SMITH March 07, 1996 She also studied at the Parsons School of Design, and the Royal College of Art, where she earned her Ph.D. (1998) with a thesis on the furniture of E. W. Godwin. 
In 1991, Mrs. Soros was turned down for the job of director of graduate education at the Parsons School of Design. So with $20 million of her husband's money, she started her own school in 1993, establishing the Bard Graduate Center where she is Professor of History of the Decorative Arts. BGC offers graduate degrees in History of the Decorative and Applied Arts, Cultural and Design History, and Garden History and Landscape Studies. The Bard Center is one of only three places in the United States where a student can obtain an advanced degree in the decorative arts. The others are the Winterthur Museum program affiliated with the University of Delaware, and the Parsons program.
Prior to establishing the BGC, Weber was Executive Director of the Open Society Institute (OSI), the umbrella name for some 24 independent foundations that support the advancement of freedom of expression around the globe. OSI also supports cultural exchange through grants to individuals and associations.

==Personal life==

In 1983, Weber married business magnate, investor, and philanthropist George Soros, twenty five years her senior, and the primary contributor to the Open Society Institute (OSI). In 2004, they separated and in 2005, they divorced. They have two children: 

==References==

==External links==


